i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Millonarios_95_F_46_C_46_	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iMillonarios Fútbol Club, also known as Millonarios, is a Colombian
iprofessional football club based in Bogotá that currently plays in the
iCategoría Primera A, the top flight of football in Colombia.
i
iIt is one of the most successful and iconic clubs in Colombia, making it one
iof the largest sports entities in the country and one of the most important
iin
iSouth America. The team's origins date back to the 1920s, but it began to be
icalled Los Millonarios in 1939 when its name was Club Deportivo Municipal. It
iwas officially founded on 18 June 1946, as Club Deportivo Los Millonarios,
iand
ilater as Millonarios Fútbol Club on 20 April 2011, when it was reconstituted
ias a public limited company. Since 1938, the team has played their home games
iat Estadio El Campín which currently holds a 36,343-capacity.
i
iMillonarios has participated in the Categoría Primera A since its inception
iin 1948, being one of only three teams to have participated in all of its
itournaments, along with Independiente Santa Fe and Atlético Nacional.
iMillonarios competes in the Clásico Capitalino against home-town rivals
iIndependiente Santa Fe and the Clásico Añejo against Deportivo Cali and also
ihas a strong rivalry with América de Cali.[2]
i
iMillonarios won their first local title in 1949 and shortly after, formed a
iteam known as the "Ballet Azul", which was a reference of great importance
iworldwide during the first part of the 1950s, being considered by various
iSouth American and European specialists as the best team in the world when it
iachieved a large number of triumphs and international achievements of great
iimportance for the time.[3][4] Alfredo Di Stefano, who is widely regarded as
ione of the greatest footballers of all time, joined Millonarios in 1949 and
iplayed for the team until 1953. During this period, Millonarios won the Copa
iColombia in 1951 and the Colombian league championship in 1949, 1951, and
i1952. Among its accomplishments, the team won the first edition of the Small
iWorld Cup of Clubs in 1953, the Golden Wedding Championship against Real
iMadrid in 1952, which the team won at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium, and the
iDuelo de Campeones Trophies in 1950 and 1951. Their participations at these
itournaments gave rise team's nickname of "Ambassador" as the club was
irepresenting Colombia at these tournaments.
i
iIt is the second most successful team in Colombian football with 21 official
ititles, including national and international championships. The team has won
i15 championships in the local Colombian League, 3 Colombian Cup titles, and 1
iColombian Super Cup title. It also won the won the Small Club World Cup in
i1953, the Copa Simón Bolívar continental championship in 1972 and the last
iedition of the Copa Merconorte in 2001.[5]
i
iAccording to the IFFHS, Millonarios is the fourth-best Colombian club of the
i20th century and the ninth-best Colombian club of the 21st century. It has
ibeen included in lists of the best football clubs of all time made by major
iinternational sports media, being the only Colombian team present on them. By
iCONMEBOL's standards, Millonarios is the third-best Colombian club in
iinternational tournaments, with 396.85 points, and ranks 51st in the official
iranking of Copa Libertadores clubs. It is recognized by FIFA as one of the
iClassic Clubs of the World and named by the organization as the First
iAmbassador of Colombian Football.[6][7]
i
i===== History =====
i
iIn 1937, a group of students from the private Catholic school Colegio Mayor
ide San Bartolomé, located in Bolivar Square, the historic center of Bogotá,
idecided to form a football team with the goal of playing against teams from
iother parts of the city. The team's first matches were played on the grounds
iof the "La Merced" estate owned by the college at the time, where the current
iColegio San Bartolomé la Merced and La Merced neighborhood now stand. Some of
ithe young players wanted to name the team "Unión Juventud" (Youth Union),
iwhile others preferred "Unión Bogotana" (Bogotan Union). As the team began to
igain popular support despite having no official backing, they alternated
ibetween the two names for each match. Eventually, they settled on the name
i"Juventud Bogotana," which combined both names.
i
iWithin a year, the team had won the hearts of many fans due to their
iimpressive victories. In a surprising turn of events, all of the players, led
iby their spokesperson Ignacio "Nacho" Izquierdo (the first important figure
iin
ithe team's history), were called up to form Colombia's first-ever national
iteam. The team made their debut in February of that year at the Central
iAmerican and Caribbean Games in Panama City, where they won the bronze medal
iin a stellar performance. Upon returning from Panama and with the team on the
ibrink of disbandment, Izquierdo saw an opportunity in the upcoming first
iedition of the Bolivarian Games to be held in Bogotá. He rallied the initial
igroup of players and formed a more structured team, which once again
irepresented the Colombian national team. The Colombian government had hired
ithe team's coach Fernando Paternoster, a former player for the Argentine
inational team and runner-up in the 1930 FIFA World Cup, to coach Colombia.
iThe
iteam also received support from the city and was acquired by the Municipal
iGovernment and Council of Bogotá, receiving economic aid. They were then
icalled Club Municipal de Deportes, becoming the official team of Bogotá and
iadopting the official colors (at that time, black and white) and crest (the
icurrent one) of the city.
i
iDespite their sporting successes, the Municipality suspended their aid due to
iproblems between the founders of Juventud Bogotana and Álvaro Rozo, the
iPresident of Club Municipal. The team was then taken over by the managers
iManuel Briceño Pardo, Antonio José Vargas, and Santander businessman Alberto
iLega (who contributed $50,000 to hire five Argentine players), who restored
ithe team's stability. Without official economic support and without colors in
itheir uniforms, the managers changed the team's name several times: Municipal
iLa Salle (when it was under the control of the students of the La Salle
iInstitute), Municipal Deportivo (when it was under the control of Briceño
iPardo, Vargas, and Lega), and later Municipal Deportivo Independiente (this
ilast name was to clarify their disengagement from the Municipality). However,
ithe press simply referred to them as the Bogotá team or selection.
i
iOn 28 January 1939 (now with the addition of "Independiente" to their name to
iclarify their disengagement from the Municipality), the team made their debut
iwith the three Argentine players against the Antioquia team, winning 5–4 with
igoals from Lucífero (who scored three times), Carvajal, and "Nacho"
iIzquierdo.
iThis was a significant moment for football in the city, as it marked the
ifirst
itime that a team from Bogotá (and from the country) had played with foreign
iplayers. This was also the last year the team played under the name
i"Deportivo
iIndependiente." Despite facing financial difficulties and internal conflicts
iamong the team's founders and supporters, the Municipal Deportivo
iIndependiente continued to compete in various tournaments, representing
iBogotá
iand garnering significant public support. In 1946, the team merged with Club
iDeportivo Municipal and changed their name to Club Deportivo Los Millonarios.
i
iIn 1939, the nickname "Los Millonarios" (The Millionaires) was born when
iVicente Lucífero met with the team's board of directors every Thursday to
inegotiate payments. At that time, the Argentine players did not have annual
icontracts. However, Lucífero demanded high compensation not only for the
iArgentinians but for the entire team. He wanted to ensure that the Colombian
iplayers' salaries matched those of the foreigners, which caused Luis Camacho
iMontoya, the sports editor of El Tiempo newspaper, to strongly criticize the
iteam for its disassociation from the municipality. Montoya gave the team's
ileaders the label of "new rich," "Los Millonarios," because they intended to
imaintain the entire team with all its foreign players, requiring a lot of
imoney.
i
iMontoya stated, "The Argentines are very demanding; they will charge this and
ithat amount. This is a club of millionaires; the Municipalists are now
imillionaires." Thus, the nickname was born, which would become its definitive
iname since people started to know and call the team more by the nickname "Los
iMillonarios" than by its actual name. In 1932, seven years prior, the
iArgentine club River Plate had already adopted the same nickname for making
ibig signings at that time.
i
iOn August 13, 1939, in a meeting at the "El Gato Negro" café (16th Street
iwith Eighth Avenue), the team officially adopted the name "Los Millonarios"
ias
ipart of a relaunch and re-founding of the club, which took place on that date
iwhen they defeated Deportivo Barranquilla 6–0 with goals from Luis Timón (1–0
iand 5–0), Martínez, Ruiz Díaz, Zapata, and an own goal by López. During this
igame, they debuted their current blue uniform with grey socks, copied from
ithe
iArgentine team Tigre, which had recently graced the cover of El Gráfico
imagazine and was the team Fernando Paternoster supported. This uniform
iremained the same, with the only change suggested by the leader Manuel
iBriceño
iPardo for the next game. It consisted of changing the shorts to white and the
isocks to blue (due to its association with the Colombian Conservative Party)
iand establishing it definitively as the team's official uniform, which was
ifurther consolidated years later with the colors used by Independiente Santa
iFe (referencing the Colombian Liberal Party).
i
iThe first team to be called Millonarios consisted of: Carlos Álvarez, Antenor
iRodríguez (captain), Ignacio "Nacho" Izquierdo, Alfredo Cuezzo, Alfonso "Che"
iPiedrahíta, Óscar Sabransky, Vicente Lucífero, Antonio Ruiz Díaz, Luis Timón,
iJosé Antonio "Mico" Zapata, and Antonio Martínez.
i
iSince its creation, Millonarios has become one of Colombia's most important
iteams by winning titles in amateur league tournaments, international matches,
iand various tours throughout the country, achieving significant triumphs. The
iteam became the great favorite for the title from the moment the first
iColombian Professional Football Championship began in 1948.
i
iAfter being structured and leaving behind its past as a city select team,
iMillonarios entered the A.D.B. (Bogotá Sports Association) championship in
i1940, which was the second-tier tournament in the Cundinamarca football
ileague. In the same year, they won the title and ascended to the first
icategory, in which they participated from 1941 to 1945, winning four titles
i(1941, 1943, 1944, 1945).[8]
i
iMillonarios greatly benefited from a major players' strike in the Argentinian
ileague in 1948, which caused a great diaspora of players towards Colombia.
iThe
ifollowing year, Millonarios won its first league title.
i
iThe most successful period for the club was during the early 1950s due to the
inotable Argentinean presence. During this period the squad was known as The
iBlue Ballet, which featured great players such as Di Stefano, Adolfo
iPedernera, Néstor Rossi, Julio Cozzi, Antonio "Maestrico" Báez, Hugo Reyes,
iReinaldo Mourin and other figures in Argentina, mainly from River Plate.
iThanks to the great football these players showed on the field, Millonarios
iwas named by several media outlets in South America and Europe, as the best
iteam in the world in the early 1950s. In March 1952, Millonarios traveled to
iSpain and beat Real Madrid 4–2 at Estadio Santiago Bernabeu.[3][4] They won
ithree straight titles from 1951 to 1953, called a "tricampeonato", and won
ithe
iCopa Colombia in 1952.
i
iIn 1951, Colombia was suspended by FIFA due to the recruitment of
iinternational players without a pass; the teams were forced to return all
iexpatriate players that had participated in the tournament through irregular
imeans. This edict marked the departure of di Stefano in February 1953,
ireceiving bids from Barcelona and Real Madrid, who came to win the bid for
ithe
iplayer.[9] The Colombia national team was also banned from the 1954 FIFA
iWorld
iCup for the same reason.
i
iIn 1952, a group of Venezuelan sports entrepreneurs created the Small Club
iWorld Cup, a friendly competition that brought together leading European and
iSouth American teams. Millonarios was invited to participate in the 1952 and
i1953 editions. In its first appearance, the team finished with seven points,
ibehind Real Madrid (double tie 1–1) and Brazilian Botafogo (4–4 tie and
idefeat
i0–2); the tournament was played in a two-round scheme, and involved host La
iSalle of Venezuela (double win 4–1 and 5–1).
i
iIn its participation in 1953, the team was crowned undefeated champion with
i11 points, above River Plate of Argentina (5–1 win and 1–1 tie), Rapid Wien
iof
iAustria (double win 2–1 and 4–0) and Spanish Espanyol of Barcelona (double
iwin
i6–0 and 4–0). This friendly tournament is considered by some to be a
ipredecessor of the Intercontinental Cup, now known as FIFA Club World Cup,
ithough not its equivalent.
i
iFollowing their 1953 title, the team's performance in the local championship
ideclined as they were forced to sell their foreign players and use mostly
iyouth players. This culminated in a last place finish in the 1957 season,
ialthough in the following season Millonarios finished second behind rivals
iSanta Fe by just one point.[10]
i
iMillonarios won their fifth league title in 1959, paving the way for a second
igolden era in the 1960s, where they won four titles in a row from 1961 to
i1964. In the 1970s, the team won the title in 1972 and 1978, and came very
iclose to winning it multiple times, finishing runner-up in 1973 and 1975, and
ithird in 1974, 1976 and 1977.
i
iMillonarios won two more titles during this decade: the 1987 and 1988 league
ititles, with star players such as Arnoldo Iguarán, Mario Vanemerak, and
iCarlos
iEstrada. The 1988 title was the last title the club won before their 23-year
ititle drought.
i
iThe club came very close to winning the title in 1994, but America de Cali
isnatched it from them on the final matchday because they also won their
imatch.
iMillonarios also had a good 1999 season. Although they finished outside the
itop ten in the Apertura, in the Finalizacion, they collected 42 points, and
iwere undefeated during the regular season, while also setting a 29-match
iundefeated record, but fell in the playoffs and failed to reach qualification
ifor the final, which was later won by Atletico Nacional.
i
iIn 2001, Millonarios won the Copa Merconorte, beating Mexican club Necaxa in
ithe semi-finals on their way to the finals, where they beat Ecuadorian team
iEmelec on penalty kicks, after both legs had ended in draws.
i
iMillonarios had further improvement when former Manchester City assistant
imanager Juan Carlos Osorio was appointed as the new manager in July 2006,
ireplacing Miguel Prince, who had led the club to a sixth-placed finish in the
iApertura. Osorio led the club into the playoffs for the Finalizacion, and was
ione point away from making the finals in the playoffs. The club finished
ififth
iin the aggregate table for the year, taking the club once again into the Copa
iSudamericana, while the team's financial situation also had a notable
irecovery.
i
iIn July 2007, Osorio left Millonarios to manage Major League Soccer side
iChicago Fire, and he was replaced with Martín Lasarte;[11] after a brief, but
ivery unsuccessful period with Lasarte, Millonarios then hired Argentinian
iMario Vanemerak as their new manager. Under Vanemerak, Millonarios began to
ishine again, most notably in the 2007 Copa Sudamericana. Although they had a
iscare in the first stage, where they just barely edged Peruvian club Coronel
iBolognesi on penalties, they went on to eliminate several powerful teams,
iincluding beating rivals Nacional 3–2 and then shutting out Brazilian
ichampions São Paulo 3–0 in the quarter-finals. Millonarios was eventually
ieliminated by Mexican side Club América 5–2 on aggregate to put their run to
ian end, but the club had a less impressive performance in the 2007
iFinalizacion, finishing eleventh in the table and missing out on the
iplayoffs.
i
iAfter Millonarios failed to qualify for the playoffs in the 2008 Apertura,
iVanemerak was dismissed. He was replaced by Óscar Quintabani, who had won
iback
ito back championships with Nacional.[12] In his first season, the 2008
iFinalizacion, the club barely missed out on a playoff spot by goal
idifference.
iHowever, in the 2009 Apertura the club finished 15th after a very poor
icampaign, and Quintabani left the club shortly after. Results did not
isignificantly improve, and the club missed out on the playoffs in the 2009
iFinalizacion and both tournaments of 2010.
i
iPlagued by financial problems, and with no major titles in the last decade,
ias well as having failed to qualify for the playoffs in the last seven
iseasons, the club finally initiated a bankruptcy process that led to it being
ibought by a society composed of about 4,000 fans, Azul & Blanco, SA. This
imovement also meant a change in playing style which started with the hiring
iof
iVenezuelan coach Richard Páez.
i
iPaez led the club to a sixth-placed finish in the 2011 Apertura and playoff
isemi-finals. The 2011 Finalizacion was even better, with the club finishing
ifourth in the league, and they were set to qualify for the finals after a 3–0
iwin against Junior in the semi-finals first leg, but Junior made a comeback
iin
iBarranquilla and tied the series, then shortly after won on penalties to
ieliminate Millonarios.
i
iHowever, the Millonarios fans were not left without anything to celebrate, as
ithe club won the 2011 Copa Colombia with a great run that included a
ifirst-place finish in their group, a comeback win against Deportes Tolima in
ithe quarter finals, and then a 4–1 away win against Junior in the
isemi-finals,
ibefore topping it off by winning both games against Boyacá Chicó in the
ifinals, clinching a spot in the 2012 Copa Sudamericana while also ending a
i23-year title drought.
i
iIn June 2012, it was confirmed that Hernán Torres would be the new coach
iafter a poor Apertura campaign where the club missed out on the playoffs. In
iCopa Sudamericana, the team was highly successful, reaching the semi-finals
iafter eliminating Brazilian powerhouses Palmeiras and Gremio, with
iMillonarios
ihaving lost the first legs both times but made comebacks, and they were
ieventually eliminated on away goals by runner-up, Argentine club Tigre. This
icame as a relief after an embarrassing 8–0 defeat to Real Madrid in a
ifriendly
imatch in September to honor Alfredo Di Stéfano.
i
iDespite the Copa Sudamericana elimination and heavy defeat to Real Madrid,
ithe team had a great performance in the 2012 Finalizacion, qualifying to the
iplay-offs as the best team of the campaign. After a very difficult series of
imatches, the team finished the playoffs with ten points, equal with Deportivo
iPasto, but reached the Finals on better goal difference, which were to be
iplayed against Independiente Medellín. The first leg was played at Estadio
iAtanasio Girardotin Medellín, and ended in a 0–0 tie. The second leg was
iplayed on 16 December 2012 in Bogotá, and ended in a 1–1 draw, sending the
imatch to a penalty shootout, where Goalkeeper Delgado managed to save a
ipenalty and help his team win the shootout 5–4, as well as helping
iMillonarios
iwin its 14th championship, their first league title in about 24 years.
i
iAs the 2012 Finalización champion, Millonarios qualified to the 2013 Copa
iLibertadores group stage, where it had a poor performance. They finished last
iin their group, with only one win and five losses.[13]
i
iIn the 2017 Finalización, Millonarios achieved their 15th league title after
idefeating Santa Fe in a final that saw 2 goals at the ending of the second
ihalf. Said final ended with a tie, that concluded an aggregate 3–2 win over
itheir crosstown rivals.
i
i===== Rivalries =====
i
iMillonarios has forged many rivalries with several teams from the league,
imost notably with local rivals Independiente Santa Fe. This derby is
ipopularly
icalled El Clásico Capitalino (The Capital Classic). It is the only local
iderby
ithat has been played every season since the beginning of Colombian
iprofessional football in 1948. On September 16, 2007, Millonarios completed
i100 victories in their Bogotá derby clashes against Santa Fe in the 248th
iderby match, which ended in a 1–0 victory. The goal was scored by Gerardo
iBedoya. Currently, the number of wins for Millonarios is 125 against 90 for
iSanta Fe.
i
iFrom March 2015 to March 2017, Millonarios maintained a nine-match unbeaten
istreak without losing to Santa Fe, with three draws and six victories. The
imost outstanding was in the 2015 Torneo Apertura, when Millonarios eliminated
iSanta Fe from the playoffs on the last matchday with a score of 3–1. The
igoals
iwere converted by Román Torres, Fernando Uribe and Rafael Robayo.
i
iOn March 19, 2017 Millonarios cut an undefeated 22 match run by Santa Fe.
iMillonarios won 3–0 with goals by Andrés Cadavid, Ayron del Valle and Deiver
iMachado. On December 13 of the same year, the Embajador team and the Cardenal
imet in the final of the 2017 Finalización. In the first leg, where
iMillonarios
iwere the home team, they won after a header from Matías de los Santos. In the
isecond leg, played on December 17, Millonarios came back from an adverse
iresult twice, first with a goal by Andrés Cadavid, and finally with one by
iHenry Rojas, for a 3–2 aggregate score, with which they won their 15th league
ichampionship.
i
iMillonarios also have strong rivalries with other teams such as Atlético
iNacional, América de Cali, and Deportivo Cali. The rivalry with Nacional is
ioften times called the most important in Colombian football, because both
iclubs share the most titles and are the most winning teams in the
icountry.[14]
i
i===== Honours =====
i
i===== Performance in CONMEBOL competitions =====
i
i===== Players =====
i
iNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules.
iPlayers may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.
i
iNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules.
iPlayers may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.
i
iSource: BDFA
i
iLast updated on: 3 October 2018
i
iSource: BDFA
i
iLast updated on: 3 October 2018
i
i===== Managers =====
i
i===== Affiliated teams =====
i
iNotes:
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millonarios_F.C.
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Millonarios F.C. - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Millonarios_95_F_46_C_46_	texopher.com	70
