i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Portugal	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
i– in Europe (green & dark grey) – in the European Union (green)
i
iPortugal (Portuguese pronunciation: [puɾtuˈɣal]), officially the Portuguese
iRepublic (Portuguese: República Portuguesa [ʁɛˈpuβlikɐ puɾtuˈɣezɐ]),[note 4]
iis a country located on the Iberian Peninsula, in Southwestern Europe, and
iwhose territory also includes the macaronesian archipelagos of the Azores,
iMadeira, and the Savage Islands. It features the westernmost point in
icontinental Europe, and its Iberian portion is bordered to the west and south
iby the Atlantic Ocean and to the north and east by Spain, the sole country to
ihave a land border with Portugal. Its archipelagos form two autonomous
iregions
iwith their own regional governments. Lisbon is the capital and largest city
iby
ipopulation.
i
iOne of the oldest countries in Europe, its territory has been continuously
isettled, invaded and fought over since prehistoric times. The territory was
ifirst inhabited by the Celtic peoples with pre-Romans soon after. (At the
itime
iof the first large-scale Roman invasions in Western Iberia, they
ipreponderantly were the Lusitanians, the Gallaecians, the Celtici and, to
isome
iextent, the Conii). These peoples had commercial and some cultural contact
iwith Phoenicians, ancient Greeks and Carthaginians. It was later ruled by the
iRomans, followed by the invasions of Germanic peoples (most prominently, the
iSuebi and the Visigoths) together with the Alans, and later the Moors, who
iwere eventually expelled during the Reconquista. Founded first as a county
iwithin the Kingdom of León in 868, the country officially gained its
iindependence as the Kingdom of Portugal with the Treaty of Zamora in
i1143.[14]
i
iIn the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal established one of the longest-lived
imaritime and commercial empires, becoming one of the main economic and
ipolitical powers of the time.[15] At the end of the 16th century, Portugal
isuffered a war for the crown succession with Spain, leading to the Iberian
iUnion. The Portuguese Restoration War re-instated the House of Braganza in
i1640 after a period of substantial loss to Portugal.[16]
i
iBy the early 19th century, the accumulative crisis, events such as the 1755
iLisbon earthquake, the country's occupation during the Napoleonic Wars, and
ithe resulting independence of Brazil in 1822 led to a marked decay of
iPortugal's prior opulence.[17] This was followed by the civil war between
iliberal constitutionalists and conservative absolutists over royal
isuccession,
iwhich lasted from 1828 to 1834. The 1910 revolution deposed Portugal's
icenturies-old monarchy, and established the democratic but unstable
iPortuguese
iFirst Republic, later being superseded by the Estado Novo (New State)
iauthoritarian regime. Democracy was restored after the Carnation Revolution
i(1974), ending the Portuguese Colonial War and eventually losing its
iremaining
icolonial possessions.
i
iPortugal has left a profound cultural, architectural and linguistic influence
iacross the globe, with a legacy of around 250 million Portuguese speakers
iaround the world. It is a developed country with an advanced economy which
iholds the 14th largest gold reserve at its national central bank,[18] has the
i8th largest proven reserves of lithium,[19][20][21] with the weight of
iexports
irepresenting 49% of its GDP in 2022.[22] A member of the United Nations, the
iEuropean Union, the Schengen Area and the Council of Europe (CoE), Portugal
iwas also one of the founding members of NATO, the eurozone, the OECD, and the
iCommunity of Portuguese Language Countries.
i
i===== Etymology =====
i
iThe word Portugal derives from the combined Roman-Celtic place name Portus
iCale;[23][24] a settlement where present-day’s conurbation of Porto and Vila
iNova de Gaia (or simply, Gaia) stand, along the banks of River Douro in the
inorth of what is now Portugal. The name of Porto stems from the Latin word
ifor
iport or harbour, portus, with the second element Cale’s meaning and precise
iorigin being less clear. The mainstream explanation points to an ethnonym
iderived from the Callaeci also known as Gallaeci peoples, who occupied the
inorth-west of the Iberian Peninsula.[25] The names Cale and Callaici are the
iorigin of today's Gaia and Galicia.[26][27]
i
iAnother theory proposes that Cale or Calle is a derivation of the Celtic word
ifor 'port', like the Irish caladh or Scottish Gaelic cala. These
iexplanations,
iwould require the pre-Roman language of the area to have been a branch of
iQ-Celtic, which is not generally accepted because the region's pre-Roman
ilanguage was Gallaecian. However, scholars like Jean Markale and Tranoy
ipropose that the Celtic branches all share the same origin, and placenames
isuch as Cale, Gal, Gaia, Calais, Galatia, Galicia, Gaelic, Gael, Gaul (Latin:
iGallia),[28] Wales, Cornwall, Wallonia and others all stem from one
ilinguistic
iroot.[26][29][30]
i
iA further explanation proposes Gatelo as having been the origin of
ipresent-day Braga, Santiago de Compostela, and consequently the wider regions
iof Northern Portugal and Galicia.[31] A different theory has it that Cala was
ithe name of a Celtic goddess (drawing a comparison with the Gaelic Cailleach,
ia supernatural hag). Further still, some French scholars believe the name may
ihave come from Portus Gallus,[32] the port of the Gauls or Celts.
i
iAround 200 BC, the Romans took the Iberian Peninsula from the Carthaginians
iduring the Second Punic War. In the process they conquered Cale, renaming it
iPortus Cale ('Port of Cale') and incorporating it in the province of
iGaellicia
iwith its capital in Bracara Augusta (modern day Braga, Portugal). During the
iMiddle Ages, the region around Portus Cale became known by the Suebi and
iVisigoths as Portucale. The name Portucale evolved into Portugale during the
i7th and 8th centuries, and by the 9th century, that term was used extensively
ito refer to the region between the rivers Douro and Minho. By the 11th and
i12th centuries, Portugale, Portugallia, Portvgallo or Portvgalliae was
ialready
ireferred to as Portugal.
i
iThe 14th-century Middle French name for the country, Portingal, which added
ian intrusive /n/ sound through the process of excrescence, spread to Middle
iEnglish.[33] Middle English variant spellings included Portingall,
iPortingale,[note 5] Portyngale and Portingaill.[33][35] The spelling
iPortyngale is found in Chaucer's Epilogue to the Nun's Priest's Tale. These
ivariants survive in the Torrent of Portyngale, a Middle English romance
icomposed around 1400, and "Old Robin of Portingale", an English Child ballad.
iPortingal and variants were also used in Scots[33] and survive in the Cornish
iname for the country, Portyngal.
i
i===== History =====
i
iThe early history of Portugal is shared with the rest of the Iberian
iPeninsula located in south-western Europe. The name of Portugal derives from
ithe joined Romano-Celtic name Portus Cale. The region was settled by
iPre-Celts
iand Celts, giving origin to peoples like the Gallaeci, Lusitanians,[36]
iCeltici and Cynetes (also known as Conii),[37] visited by
iPhoenicians-Carthaginians and Ancient Greeks, was incorporated in the Roman
iRepublic dominions as Lusitania and part of Gallaecia, after 45 BC until 298
iAD.
i
iThe region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by Neanderthals and then by
iHomo sapiens, who roamed the border-less region of the northern Iberian
ipeninsula.[38] These were subsistence societies and although they did not
iestablish prosperous settlements, they did form organized societies.
iNeolithic
iPortugal experimented with domestication of herding animals, the raising of
isome cereal crops and fluvial or marine fishing.[38]
i
iIt is believed by some scholars that early in the first millennium BC,
iseveral waves of Celts invaded Portugal from Central Europe and inter-married
iwith the local populations, forming different tribes.[39] Another theory
isuggests that Celts inhabited western Iberia / Portugal well before any large
iCeltic migrations from Central Europe.[40] In addition, a number of linguists
iexpert in ancient Celtic have presented compelling evidence that the
iTartessian language, once spoken in parts of SW Spain and SW Portugal, is at
ileast proto-Celtic in structure.[41]
i
iModern archaeology and research shows a Portuguese root to the Celts in
iPortugal and elsewhere.[42] During that period and until the Roman invasions,
ithe Castro culture (a variation of the Urnfield culture also known as
iUrnenfelderkultur) was prolific in Portugal and modern Galicia.[43][44][27]
iThis culture, together with the surviving elements of the Atlantic megalithic
iculture[45] and the contributions that come from the more Western
iMediterranean cultures, ended up in what has been called the Cultura Castreja
ior Castro Culture.[46][47] This designation refers to the characteristic
iCeltic populations called 'dùn', 'dùin' or 'don' in Gaelic and that the
iRomans
icalled castrae in their chronicles.[48]
i
iBased on the Roman chronicles about the Callaeci peoples, along with the
iLebor Gabála Érenn[49] narrations and the interpretation of the abundant
iarchaeological remains throughout the northern half of Portugal and Galicia,
iit is possible to infer that there was a matriarchal society, with a military
iand religious aristocracy probably of the feudal type.[citation needed] The
ifigures of maximum authority were the chieftain (chefe tribal), of military
itype and with authority in his Castro or clan, and the druid, mainly
ireferring
ito medical and religious functions that could be common to several castros.
iThe Celtic cosmogony remained homogeneous due to the ability of the druids to
imeet in councils with the druids of other areas, which ensured the
itransmission of knowledge and the most significant events.[citation needed]
i
iThe first documentary references to Castro society are provided by
ichroniclers of Roman military campaigns such as Strabo, Herodotus and Pliny
ithe Elder among others, about the social organization, and describing the
iinhabitants of these territories, the Gallaeci of Northern Portugal as:
i
i"A group of barbarians who spend the day fighting and the night eating,
idrinking and dancing under the moon."
i
iThere were other similar tribes, and chief among them were the Lusitanians;
ithe core area of these people lay in inland central Portugal, while numerous
iother related tribes existed such as the Celtici of Alentejo, and the Cynetes
ior Conii of the Algarve. Among the tribes or sub-divisions were the Bracari,
iCoelerni, Equaesi, Grovii, Interamici, Leuni, Luanqui, Limici, Narbasi,
iNemetati, Paesuri, Quaquerni, Seurbi, Tamagani, Tapoli, Turduli, Turduli
iVeteres, Turdulorum Oppida, Turodi, and Zoelae. A few small, semi-permanent,
icommercial coastal settlements (such as Tavira) were also founded in the
iAlgarve region by Phoenicians–Carthaginians.
i
iRomans first invaded the Iberian Peninsula in 219 BC. The Carthaginians,
iRome's adversary in the Punic Wars, were expelled from their coastal
icolonies.
iDuring the last days of Julius Caesar, almost the entire peninsula was
iannexed
ito the Roman Republic.
i
iThe Roman conquest of what is now part of Portugal took almost two hundred
iyears and took many lives of young soldiers and the lives of those who were
isentenced to a certain death in the slave mines when not sold as slaves to
iother parts of the empire. Roman occupation suffered a severe setback in 155
iBC, when a rebellion began in the north. The Lusitanians and other native
itribes, under the leadership of Viriathus,[50][51] wrested control of all of
iwestern Iberia.
i
iRome sent numerous legions and its best generals to Lusitania to quell the
irebellion, but to no avail – the Lusitanians kept conquering territory. The
iRoman leaders decided to change their strategy. They bribed Viriathus's
iallies
ito kill him. In 139 BC, Viriathus was assassinated and Tautalus became leader
iof the Lusitanians.
i
iRome installed a colonial regime. The complete Romanization of Lusitania only
itook place in the Visigothic era.
i
iIn 27 BC, Lusitania gained the status of Roman province. Later, a northern
iprovince of Lusitania was formed, known as Gallaecia, with capital in Bracara
iAugusta, today's Braga.[52] There are still many ruins of castros (hill
iforts)
ithroughout modern Portugal and remains of the Castro culture. Some urban
iremains are quite large, like Conímbriga and Mirobriga. The former, beyond
ibeing one of the largest Roman settlements in Portugal, is also classified as
ia National Monument. Conímbriga lies 16 kilometres (10 miles) from Coimbra,
iwhich in turn was the ancient Aeminium. The site also has a museum that
idisplays objects found by archaeologists during their excavations.
i
iSeveral works of engineering, such as baths, temples, bridges, roads,
icircuses, theatres and laymen's homes are preserved throughout the country.
iCoins, some coined in Lusitanian land, as well as numerous pieces of
iceramics,
iwere also found. Contemporary historians include Paulus Orosius (c.
i375–418)[53] and Hydatius (c. 400–469), bishop of Aquae Flaviae, who reported
ion the final years of the Roman rule and arrival of the Germanic tribes.
i
iIn the early 5th century, Germanic tribes, namely the Suebi[54] and the
iVandals (Silingi and Hasdingi) together with their allies, the Sarmatians and
iAlans invaded the Iberian Peninsula where they would form their kingdom. The
iKingdom of the Suebi[55] was the Germanic post-Roman kingdom, established in
ithe former Roman provinces of Gallaecia-Lusitania. 5th-century vestiges of
iAlan settlements were found in Alenquer (from old Germanic Alan kerk, temple
iof the Alans), Coimbra and Lisbon.[56]
i
iAbout 410 and during the 6th century it became a formally declared Kingdom of
ithe Suebi,[55][54] where king Hermeric made a peace treaty with the
iGallaecians before passing his domains to Rechila, his son. In 448 Rechila
idied, leaving the state in expansion to Rechiar. After the defeat against the
iVisigoths, the Suebian kingdom was divided, with Frantan and Aguiulfo ruling
isimultaneously. Both reigned from 456 to 457, the year in which Maldras
i(457–459) reunified the kingdom. He was assassinated after a failed
iRoman-Visigothic conspiracy. Although the conspiracy did not achieve its true
ipurposes, the Suebian Kingdom was again divided between two kings: Frumar
i(Frumario 459–463) and Remismund (Remismundo, son of Maldras) (459–469) who
iwould re-reunify his father's kingdom in 463. He would be forced to adopt
iArianism in 465 due to the Visigoth influence. By 500, the Visigothic Kingdom
ihad been installed in Iberia, it was based in Toledo and advancing westwards.
iThey became a threat to the Suebian rule. After the death of Remismund in 469
ia dark period set in, where virtually all written texts and accounts
idisappear. This period lasted until 550. The only thing known about this
iperiod is that Theodemund (Teodemundo) most probably ruled the Suebians. The
idark period ended with the reign of Karriarico (550–559) who reinstalled
iCatholic Christianity in 550. He was succeeded by Theodemar (559–570) during
iwhose reign the 1st Council of Braga (561) was held.
i
iThe councils represented an advance in the organization of the territory
i(paroeciam suevorum (Suebian parish) and the Christianization of the pagan
ipopulation (De correctione rusticorum) under the auspices of Saint Martin of
iBraga (São Martinho de Braga).[57]
i
iAfter the death of Teodomiro, Miro (570–583) was his successor. During his
ireign, the 2nd Council of Braga (572) was held. The Visigothic civil war
ibegan
iin 577. Miro intervened. Later in 583 he also organized an unsuccessful
iexpedition to reconquer Seville. During the return from this failed operation
iMiro died.
i
iIn the Suebian Kingdom many internal struggles continued to take place.
iEborico (Eurico, 583–584) was dethroned by Andeca (Audeca 584–585), who
ifailed
ito prevent the Visigothic invasion led by Leovigildo. The Visigothic
iinvasion,
icompleted in 585, turned the once rich and fertile kingdom of the Suebi into
ithe sixth province of the Gothic kingdom.[58] Leovigild was crowned King of
iGallaecia, Hispania and Gallia Narbonensis.
i
iFor the next 300 years and by the year 700, the entire Iberian Peninsula was
iruled by the Visigoths.[59][60][61][62][63] Under the Visigoths, Gallaecia
iwas
ia well-defined space governed by a doge of its own. Doges at this time were
irelated to the monarchy and acted as princes in all matters. Both 'governors'
iWamba and Wittiza (Vitiza) acted as doge (they would later become kings in
iToledo). These two became known as the 'vitizians', who headquartered in the
inorthwest and called on the Arab invaders from the South to be their allies
iin
ithe struggle for power in 711. King Roderic (Rodrigo) was killed while
iopposing this invasion, thus becoming the last Visigothic king of Iberia.
iFrom
ithe various Germanic groups who settled in western Iberia, the Suebi left the
istrongest lasting cultural legacy in what is today Portugal, Galicia and
iwestern fringes of Asturias.[64][65][66] According to Dan Stanislawski, the
iPortuguese way of living in regions North of the Tagus is mostly inherited
ifrom the Suebi, in which small farms prevail, distinct from the large
iproperties of Southern Portugal. Bracara Augusta, the modern city of Braga
iand
iformer capital of Gallaecia, became the capital of the Suebi.[57] Apart from
icultural and some linguistic traces, the Suebians left the highest Germanic
igenetic contribution of the Iberian Peninsula in Portugal and
iGalicia.[67][self-published source?] Orosius, at that time resident in
iHispania, shows a rather pacific initial settlement, the newcomers working
itheir lands[68] or serving as bodyguards of the locals.[69] Another Germanic
igroup that accompanied the Suebi and settled in Gallaecia were the Buri. They
isettled in the region between the rivers Cávado and Homem, in the area known
ias Terras de Bouro (Lands of the Buri).[70]
i
iToday's continental Portugal, along with most of modern Spain, was part of
ial-Andalus between 726 and 1249, following the Umayyad Caliphate conquest of
ithe Iberian Peninsula. This rule lasted from some decades in the North to
ifive
icenturies in the South.[71]
i
iAfter defeating the Visigoths in only a few months, the Umayyad Caliphate
istarted expanding rapidly in the peninsula. Beginning in 726, the land that
iis
inow Portugal became part of the vast Umayyad Caliphate's empire of Damascus,
iwhich stretched from the Indus river in the Indian sub-continent up to the
iSouth of France, until its collapse in 750. That year the west of the empire
igained its independence under Abd-ar-Rahman I with the establishment of the
iEmirate of Córdoba. After almost two centuries, the Emirate became the
iCaliphate of Córdoba in 929, until its dissolution a century later in 1031
iinto no less than 23 small kingdoms, called Taifa kingdoms.[71]
i
iThe governors of the taifas each proclaimed themselves Emir of their
iprovinces and established diplomatic relations with the Christian kingdoms of
ithe north. Most of present-day Portugal fell into the hands of the Taifa of
iBadajoz of the Aftasid Dynasty, and after a short spell of an ephemeral Taifa
iof Lisbon in 1022, fell under the dominion of the Taifa of Seville of the
iAbbadids poets. The Taifa period ended with the conquest of the Almoravids
iwho
icame from Morocco in 1086 winning a decisive victory at the Battle of
iSagrajas, followed a century later in 1147, after the second period of Taifa,
iby the Almohads, also from Marrakesh.[72] Al-Andaluz was divided into
idifferent districts called Kura. Gharb Al-Andalus at its largest consisted of
iten kuras,[73] each with a distinct capital and governor. The main cities of
ithe period in Portugal were in the southern half of the country: Beja,
iSilves,
iAlcácer do Sal, Santarém and Lisbon. The Muslim population of the region
iconsisted mainly of native Iberian converts to Islam (the so-called Muwallad
ior Muladi) and Arabs. The Arabs were principally noblemen from Syria and
iYemen; and though few in numbers, they constituted the elite of the
ipopulation. The Berbers were originally from the Rif and Atlas mountains
iregion of North Africa and were nomads.[71]
i
iAn Asturian Visigothic noble named Pelagius of Asturias in 718 was elected
ileader[74] by many of the ousted Visigoth nobles. Pelagius called for the
iremnant of the Christian Visigothic armies to rebel against the Moors and
iregroup in the unconquered northern Asturian highlands, better known today as
ithe Cantabrian Mountains, in what is today the small mountain region in
inorth-western Spain, adjacent to the Bay of Biscay.[75]
i
iPelagius' plan was to use the Cantabrian mountains as a place of refuge and
iprotection from the invading Moors. He then aimed to regroup the Iberian
iPeninsula's Christian armies and use the Cantabrian mountains as a
ispringboard
ifrom which to regain their lands. In the process, after defeating the Moors
iin
ithe Battle of Covadonga in 722, Pelagius was proclaimed king, thus founding
ithe Christian Kingdom of Asturias and starting the war of Christian
ireconquest
iknown in Portuguese as the Reconquista Cristã.[75]
i
iAt the end of the 9th century, the region of Portugal, between the rivers
iMinho and Douro, was reconquered from the Moors by the nobleman and knight
iVímara Peres on the orders of King Alfonso III of Asturias. Finding that the
iregion had previously had two major cities – Portus Cale in the coast and
iBraga in the interior, with many towns that were now deserted – he decided to
irepopulate and rebuild them with Portuguese and Galician refugees and other
iChristians.[76] Apart from the Arabs from the South, the coastal regions in
ithe North were also attacked by Norman and Viking[77][78] raiders mainly from
i844. The last great invasion, through the Minho (river), ended with the
idefeat
iof Olaf II Haraldsson in 1014 against the Galician nobility who also stopped
ifurther advances into the County of Portugal.
i
iCount Vímara Peres[79] organized the region he had reconquered, and elevated
iit to the status of County, naming it the County of Portugal after the
iregion's major port city – Portus Cale or modern Porto. One of the first
icities Vimara Peres founded at this time is Vimaranes, known today as
iGuimarães – the "birthplace of the Portuguese nation" or the "cradle city"
i(Cidade Berço in Portuguese).[76]
i
iAfter annexing the County of Portugal into one of the several counties that
imade up the Kingdom of Asturias, King Alfonso III of Asturias knighted Vímara
iPeres, in 868, as the First Count of Portus Cale (Portugal). The region
ibecame
iknown as Portucale, Portugale, and simultaneously Portugália – the County of
iPortugal.[76]
i
iLater the Kingdom of Asturias was divided into a number of Christian Kingdoms
iin Northern Iberia due to dynastic divisions of inheritance among the king's
ioffspring. With the forced abdication of Alfonso III "the Great" of Asturias
iby his sons in 910, the Kingdom of Asturias split into three separate
ikingdoms. The three kingdoms were eventually reunited in 924 under the crown
iof León.
i
iIn 1093, Alfonso VI of León bestowed the county to Henry of Burgundy and
imarried him to his illegitimate daughter, Teresa of León, for his role in
ireconquering the land from Moors. Henry based his newly formed county in
iBracara Augusta (modern Braga), capital city of the ancient Roman province,
iand also previous capital of several kingdoms over the first millennia.
i
iOn 24 June 1128, the Battle of São Mamede occurred near Guimarães. Afonso
iHenriques, Count of Portugal, defeated his mother Countess Teresa and her
ilover Fernão Peres de Trava, thereby establishing himself as sole leader.
iAfonso then turned his arms against the Moors in the south.
i
iAfonso's campaigns were successful and, on 25 July 1139, he obtained an
ioverwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique, and straight after was
iunanimously proclaimed King of Portugal by his soldiers. This is
itraditionally
itaken as the occasion when the County of Portugal, as a fief of the Kingdom
iof
iLeón, was transformed into the independent Kingdom of Portugal.
i
iAfonso then established the first of the Portuguese Cortes at Lamego, where
ihe was crowned by the Archbishop of Braga, though the validity of the Cortes
iof Lamego has been disputed and called a myth created during the Portuguese
iRestoration War. Afonso was recognized in 1143 by King Alfonso VII of León,
iand in 1179 by Pope Alexander III.
i
iDuring the Reconquista period, Christians reconquered the Iberian Peninsula
ifrom Moorish domination. Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by
imilitary monastic orders, pushed southward to drive out the Moors. At this
itime, Portugal covered about half of its present area. In 1249, the
iReconquista ended with the capture of the Algarve and complete expulsion of
ithe last Moorish settlements on the southern coast, giving Portugal its
ipresent-day borders, with minor exceptions.
i
iIn one of these situations of conflict with the kingdom of Castile, Dinis I
iof Portugal signed with the king Fernando IV of Castile (who was represented,
iwhen a minor, by his mother the queen Maria de Molina) the Treaty of
iAlcañices
i(1297), which stipulated that Portugal abolished agreed treaties against the
ikingdom of Castile for supporting the infant Juan de Castilla. This treaty
iestablished among other things the border demarcation between the kingdom of
iPortugal and the kingdom of Leon, where the disputed town of Olivenza was
iincluded.
i
iThe reigns of Dinis I (Denis I), Afonso IV (Alphons IV), and Pedro I (Peter
iI) for the most part saw peace with the Christian kingdoms of Iberia.
i
iIn 1348 and 1349 Portugal, like the rest of Europe, was devastated by the
iBlack Death.[80] In 1373, Portugal made an alliance with England, which is
ione
iof the oldest standing alliances in the world. Over time, this went far
ibeyond
igeo-political and military cooperation (protecting both nations' interests in
iAfrica, the Americas and Asia against French, Spanish and Dutch rivals) and
imaintained strong trade and cultural ties between the two old European
iallies.
iIn the Oporto region, in particular, there is visible English influence to
ithis day.
i
iIn 1383, John I of Castile, husband of Beatrice of Portugal and son-in-law of
iFerdinand I of Portugal, claimed the throne of Portugal. A faction of petty
inoblemen and commoners, led by John of Aviz (later King John I of Portugal)
iand commanded by General Nuno Álvares Pereira defeated the Castilians in the
iBattle of Aljubarrota. With this battle, the House of Aviz became the ruling
ihouse of Portugal.
i
iThe new ruling dynasty would proceed to push Portugal to the limelight of
iEuropean politics and culture, creating and sponsoring works of literature,
ilike the Crónicas d'el Rei D. João I by Fernão Lopes, the first riding and
ihunting manual Livro da ensinança de bem cavalgar toda sela and O Leal
iConselheiro both by King Edward of Portugal[81][82][83] and the Portuguese
itranslations of Cicero's De Oficiis and Seneca's De Beneficiis by the well
itraveled Prince Peter of Coimbra, as well as his magnum opus Tratado da
iVertuosa Benfeytoria.[84] In an effort of solidification and centralization
iof
iroyal power the monarchs of this dynasty also ordered the compilation,
iorganization and publication of the first three compilations of laws in
iPortugal: the Ordenações d'el Rei D. Duarte,[85] which was never enforced;
ithe
iOrdenações Afonsinas, whose application and enforcement was not uniform
iacross
ithe realm; and the Ordenações Manuelinas, which took advantage of the
iprinting
ipress to reach every corner of the kingdom. The Avis Dynasty also sponsored
iworks of architecture like the Mosteiro da Batalha (literally, the Monastery
iof the Battle) and led to the creation of the manueline style of architecture
iin the 16th century.
i
iPortugal also spearheaded European exploration of the world and the Age of
iDiscovery. Prince Henry the Navigator, son of King John I of Portugal, became
ithe main sponsor and patron of this endeavour. During this period, Portugal
iexplored the Atlantic Ocean, discovering the Atlantic archipelagos the
iAzores,
iMadeira, and Cape Verde; explored the African coast; colonized selected areas
iof Africa; discovered an eastern route to India via the Cape of Good Hope;
idiscovered Brazil, explored the Indian Ocean, established trading routes
ithroughout most of southern Asia; and sent the first direct European maritime
itrade and diplomatic missions to China and Japan.
i
iIn 1415, Portugal acquired the first of its overseas colonies by conquering
iCeuta, the first prosperous Islamic trade centre in North Africa. There
ifollowed the first discoveries in the Atlantic: Madeira and the Azores, which
iled to the first colonization movements.
i
iIn 1422, by decree of King John I, Portugal officially abandoned the previous
idating system, the Era of Caesar, and adopted the Anno Domini system,
itherefore becoming the last catholic realm to do so.[86]
i
iThroughout the 15th century, Portuguese explorers sailed the coast of Africa,
iestablishing trading posts for several common types of tradable commodities
iat
ithe time, ranging from gold to slaves, as they looked for a route to India
iand
iits spices, which were coveted in Europe.
i
iThe Treaty of Tordesillas, intended to resolve the dispute that had been
icreated following the return of Christopher Columbus, was made by Pope
iAlexander VI, the mediator between Portugal and Spain. It was signed on 7
iJune
i1494, and divided the newly discovered lands outside Europe between the two
icountries along a meridian 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde islands (off
ithe
iwest coast of Africa).
i
iIn 1498, Vasco da Gama accomplished what Columbus set out to do and became
ithe first European to reach India by sea, bringing economic prosperity to
iPortugal and its population of 1.7 million residents, and helping to start
ithe
iPortuguese Renaissance. In 1500, the Portuguese explorer Gaspar Corte-Real
ireached what is now Canada and founded the town of Portugal Cove-St.
iPhilip's,
iNewfoundland and Labrador, long before the French and English in the 17th
icentury, and being just one of many Portuguese colonizations of the
iAmericas.[87][88][89]
i
iIn 1500, Pedro Álvares Cabral discovered Brazil and claimed it for
iPortugal.[90] Ten years later, Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Goa in India,
iMuscat and Ormuz in the Persian Strait, and Malacca, now a state in Malaysia.
iThus, the Portuguese empire held dominion over commerce in the Indian Ocean
iand South Atlantic. Portuguese sailors set out to reach Eastern Asia by
isailing eastward from Europe, landing in such places as Taiwan, Japan, the
iisland of Timor, and in the Moluccas.
i
iAlthough for a long period it was believed the Dutch were the first Europeans
ito arrive in Australia, there is also some evidence that the Portuguese may
ihave discovered Australia in 1521.[91][92][93] From 1519 to 1522, Ferdinand
iMagellan (Fernão de Magalhães) organized a Spanish expedition to the East
iIndies which resulted in the first circumnavigation of the globe. Magellan
inever made it back to Europe as he was killed by natives in the Philippines
iin
i1521.
i
iThe Treaty of Zaragoza, signed on 22 April 1529 between Portugal and Spain,
ispecified the anti-meridian to the line of demarcation specified in the
iTreaty
iof Tordesillas.
i
iAll these factors made Portugal one of the world's major economic, military,
iand political powers from the 15th century until the late 16th century.
i
iPortugal voluntarily entered a dynastic union between 1580 and 1640. This
ioccurred because the last two kings of the House of Aviz – King Sebastian,
iwho
idied in the battle of Alcácer Quibir in Morocco, and his great-uncle and
isuccessor, King-Cardinal Henry of Portugal – both died without heirs,
iresulting in the Portuguese succession crisis of 1580.
i
iSubsequently, Philip II of Spain claimed the throne and was accepted as
iPhilip I of Portugal. Portugal did not lose its formal independence, briefly
iforming a union of kingdoms. At this time Spain was a geographic
iterritory.[94] The joining of the two crowns deprived Portugal of an
iindependent foreign policy and led to its involvement in the Eighty Years'
iWar
ibetween Spain and the Netherlands.
i
iWar led to a deterioration of the relations with Portugal's oldest ally,
iEngland, and the loss of Hormuz, a strategic trading post located between
iIran
iand Oman. From 1595 to 1663 the Dutch-Portuguese War primarily involved the
iDutch companies invading many Portuguese colonies and commercial interests in
iBrazil, Africa, India and the Far East, resulting in the loss of the
iPortuguese Indian sea trade monopoly. In 1640, John IV of Portugal
ispearheaded
ian uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king. The
iPortuguese Restoration War ended the sixty-year period of the Iberian Union
iunder the House of Habsburg. This was the beginning of the House of Braganza,
iwhich reigned in Portugal until 1910.
i
iKing John IV's eldest son came to reign as Afonso VI, however his physical
iand mental disabilities left him overpowered by Luís de Vasconcelos e Sousa,
i3rd Count of Castelo Melhor. In a palace coup organized by the King's wife,
iMaria Francisca of Savoy, and his brother, Pedro, Duke of Beja, King Afonso
iVI
iwas declared mentally incompetent and exiled first to the Azores and then to
ithe Royal Palace of Sintra, outside Lisbon. After Afonso's death, Pedro came
ito the throne as King Pedro II. Pedro's reign saw the consolidation of
inational independence, imperial expansion, and investment in domestic
iproduction.
i
iPedro II's son, John V, saw a reign characterized by the influx of gold into
ithe coffers of the royal treasury, supplied largely by the royal fifth (a tax
ion precious metals) that was received from the Portuguese colonies of Brazil
iand Maranhão.
i
iDisregarding traditional Portuguese institutions of governance, John V acted
ias an absolute monarch, nearly depleting the country's tax revenues on
iambitious architectural works, most notably Mafra Palace, and on commissions
iand additions for his sizeable art and literary collections.
i
iOwing to his craving for international diplomatic recognition, John also
ispent large sums on the embassies he sent to the courts of Europe, the most
ifamous being those he sent to Paris in 1715 and Rome in 1716.
i
iOfficial estimates – and most estimates made so far – place the number of
iPortuguese migrants to Colonial Brazil during the gold rush of the 18th
icentury at 600,000.[95] This represented one of the largest movements of
iEuropean populations to their colonies in the Americas during colonial times.
i
iIn 1738, fidalgo Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo (later ennobled as the 1st
iMarquis of Pombal) began a diplomatic career as the Portuguese Ambassador in
iLondon and later in Vienna. The Queen consort of Portugal, Archduchess Maria
iAnna of Austria, was fond of Carvalho e Melo; and after his first wife died,
ishe arranged the widowed Carvalho e Melo's second marriage to the daughter of
ithe Austrian field marshal Leopold Josef, Count von Daun. King John V,
ihowever, was not pleased and recalled Carvalho e Melo to Portugal in 1749.
iJohn V died the following year and his son, Joseph I, was crowned. In
icontrast
ito his father, Joseph I was fond of Carvalho e Melo, and with the Queen
iMother's approval, he appointed Carvalho e Melo as Minister of Foreign
iAffairs.
i
iAs the King's confidence in Carvalho e Melo increased, the King entrusted him
iwith more control of the state. By 1755, Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo
iwas
imade Prime Minister. Impressed by British economic success that he had
iwitnessed from his time as an Ambassador, he successfully implemented similar
ieconomic policies in Portugal. He abolished slavery in mainland Portugal and
iin the Portuguese colonies in India, reorganized the army and the navy,
irestructured the University of Coimbra, and ended legal discrimination
iagainst
idifferent Christian sects in Portugal by abolishing the distinction between
iOld and New Christians.
i
iCarvalho e Melo's greatest reforms were economic and financial, with the
icreation of several companies and guilds to regulate every commercial
iactivity. He created one of the first appellation systems in the world by
idemarcating the region for production of Port to ensure the wine's quality;
iand this was the first attempt to control wine quality and production in
iEurope. He ruled with a strong hand by imposing strict law upon all classes
iof
iPortuguese society from the high nobility to the poorest working class, along
iwith a widespread review of the country's tax system. These reforms gained
ihim
ienemies in the upper classes, especially among the high nobility, who
idespised
ihim as a social upstart.
i
iDisaster fell upon Portugal in the morning of 1 November 1755, when Lisbon
iwas struck by a violent earthquake with an estimated moment magnitude of
i8.5–9. The city was razed to the ground by the earthquake and the subsequent
itsunami and ensuing fires.[96] Carvalho e Melo survived by a stroke of luck
iand then immediately embarked on rebuilding the city, with his famous quote:
i"What now? We bury the dead and take care of the living."
i
iDespite the calamity and huge death toll, Lisbon suffered no epidemics and
iwithin less than one year was already being rebuilt. The new city centre of
iLisbon was designed to resist subsequent earthquakes. Architectural models
iwere built for tests, and the effects of an earthquake were simulated by
ihaving troops march around the models. The buildings and large squares of the
iPombaline Downtown still remain as one of Lisbon's tourist attractions.
iCarvalho e Melo also made an important contribution to the study of
iseismology
iby designing a detailed inquiry on the effects of the earthquake, the
iParochial Memories of 1758, that was sent to every parish in the country;
ithis
iwealth of information allows modern scientists to reconstruct the event with
isome degree of scientific precision while also giving current historians an
iimmense amount of demographic, topographic and prosopographic information on
ithe rest of the kingdom as well as information on its urban and rural areas.
i
iFollowing the earthquake, Joseph I gave his Prime Minister even more power,
iand Carvalho de Melo became a powerful, progressive dictator. As his power
igrew, his enemies increased in number, and bitter disputes with the upper
inobility became frequent. In 1758 Joseph I was wounded in an attempted
iassassination. The Távora family and the Duke of Aveiro were implicated and
isummarily executed after a quick trial. The following year, the Jesuits were
isuppressed and expelled from the country and their assets confiscated by the
icrown. Carvalho e Melo spared none involved, even women and children
i(notably,
ieight-year-old Leonor de Almeida Portugal, imprisoned in a convent for
inineteen years). This was the final stroke that crushed all opposition by
ipublicly demonstrating even the aristocracy was powerless before the King's
iloyal minister. Joseph I ennobled Carvalho e Melo as Count of Oeiras in 1759.
i
iIn 1762, Spain invaded Portuguese territory as part of the Seven Years' War,
ibut by 1763 the status quo between Spain and Portugal before the war had been
irestored.
i
iFollowing the Távora affair, the new Count of Oeiras knew no opposition.
iFurther titled "Marquês de Pombal" in 1770, he effectively ruled Portugal
iuntil Joseph I's death in 1777.
i
iThe new ruler, Queen Maria I of Portugal, disliked the Marquês de Pombal
ibecause of the power he amassed, and never forgave him for the ruthlessness
iwith which he dispatched the Távora family, and upon her accession to the
ithrone, she withdrew all his political offices. The Marquês de Pombal was
ibanished to his estate at Pombal, where he died in 1782.
i
iHowever, historians also argue that Pombal's "enlightenment," while
ifar-reaching, was primarily a mechanism for enhancing autocracy at the
iexpense
iof individual liberty and especially an apparatus for crushing opposition,
isuppressing criticism, and furthering colonial economic exploitation as well
ias intensifying book censorship and consolidating personal control and
iprofit.[97]
i
iWith the invasions by Napoleon, Portugal began a slow but inexorable decline
ithat lasted until the 20th century. This decline was hastened by the
iindependence of Brazil, the country's largest colonial possession.
i
iIn the autumn of 1807, Napoleon moved French troops through Spain to invade
iPortugal. From 1807 to 1811, British-Portuguese forces successfully fought
iagainst the French invasion of Portugal in the Peninsular War, during which
ithe royal family and the Portuguese nobility, including Maria I, relocated to
ithe Portuguese territory of Brazil, at that time a colony of the Portuguese
iEmpire, in South America. This episode is known as the Transfer of the
iPortuguese Court to Brazil.
i
iIn 1807, as Napoleon's army closed in on Lisbon, João VI of Portugal, the
iprince regent, transferred his court to Brazil and established Rio de Janeiro
ias the capital of the Portuguese Empire. In 1815, Brazil was declared a
iKingdom and the Kingdom of Portugal was united with it, forming a
ipluricontinental state, the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the
iAlgarves.
i
iAs a result of the change in its status and the arrival of the Portuguese
iroyal family, Brazilian administrative, civic, economical, military,
ieducational, and scientific apparatus were expanded and highly modernized.
iPortuguese and their allied British troops fought against the French Invasion
iof Portugal and by 1815 the situation in Europe had cooled down sufficiently
ithat João VI would have been able to return safely to Lisbon. However, the
iKing of Portugal remained in Brazil until the Liberal Revolution of 1820,
iwhich started in Porto, demanded his return to Lisbon in 1821.
i
iThus he returned to Portugal but left his son Pedro in charge of Brazil. When
ithe Portuguese Government attempted the following year to return the Kingdom
iof Brazil to subordinate status, his son Pedro, with the overwhelming support
iof the Brazilian elites, declared Brazil's independence from Portugal.
iCisplatina (today's sovereign state of Uruguay), in the south, was one of the
ilast additions to the territory of Brazil under Portuguese rule.
i
iBrazilian independence was recognized in 1825, whereby Emperor Pedro I
igranted to his father the titular honour of Emperor of Brazil. John VI's
ideath
iin 1826 caused serious questions in his succession. Though Pedro was his
iheir,
iand reigned briefly as Pedro IV, his status as a Brazilian monarch was seen
ias
ian impediment to holding the Portuguese throne by both nations. Pedro
iabdicated in favour of his daughter, Maria II (Mary II). However, Pedro's
ibrother, Infante Miguel, claimed the throne in protest. After a proposal for
iMiguel and Maria to marry failed, Miguel seized power as King Miguel I, in
i1828. In order to defend his daughter's rights to the throne, Pedro launched
ithe Liberal Wars to reinstall his daughter and establish a constitutional
imonarchy in Portugal. The war ended in 1834, with Miguel's defeat, the
ipromulgation of a constitution, and the reinstatement of Queen Maria II.
i
iQueen Maria II (Mary II) and King Ferdinand II's son, King Pedro V (Peter V)
imodernized the country during his short reign (1853–1861). Under his reign,
iroads, telegraphs, and railways were constructed and improvements in public
ihealth advanced. His popularity increased when, during the cholera outbreak
iof
i1853–1856, he visited hospitals handing out gifts and comforting the sick.
iPedro's reign was short, as he died of cholera in 1861, after a series of
ideaths in the royal family, including his two brothers Infante Fernando and
iInfante João, Duke of Beja, and his wife, Stephanie of
iHohenzollern-Sigmaringen. Pedro not having children, his brother, Luís I of
iPortugal (Louis I) ascended the throne and continued his modernization.
i
iAt the height of European colonialism in the 19th century, Portugal had
ialready lost its territory in South America and all but a few bases in Asia.
iLuanda, Benguela, Bissau, Lourenço Marques, Porto Amboim and the Island of
iMozambique were among the oldest Portuguese-founded port cities in its
iAfrican
iterritories. During this phase, Portuguese colonialism focused on expanding
iits outposts in Africa into nation-sized territories to compete with other
iEuropean powers there.
i
iWith the Conference of Berlin of 1884, Portuguese territories in Africa had
itheir borders formally established on request of Portugal in order to protect
ithe centuries-long Portuguese interests in the continent from rivalries
ienticed by the Scramble for Africa. Portuguese towns and cities in Africa
ilike
iNova Lisboa, Sá da Bandeira, Silva Porto, Malanje, Tete, Vila Junqueiro, Vila
iPery and Vila Cabral were founded or redeveloped inland during this period
iand
ibeyond. New coastal towns like Beira, Moçâmedes, Lobito, João Belo, Nacala
iand
iPorto Amélia were also founded. Even before the turn of the 20th century,
irailway tracks as the Benguela railway in Angola, and the Beira railway in
iMozambique, started to be built to link coastal areas and selected inland
iregions.
i
iOther episodes during this period of the Portuguese presence in Africa
iinclude the 1890 British Ultimatum. This forced the Portuguese military to
iretreat from the land between the Portuguese colonies of Mozambique and
iAngola
i(most of present-day Zimbabwe and Zambia), which had been claimed by Portugal
iand included in its "Pink Map", which clashed with British aspirations to
icreate a Cape to Cairo Railway.
i
iThe Portuguese territories in Africa were Cape Verde, São Tomé and Príncipe,
iPortuguese Guinea, Angola, and Mozambique. The tiny fortress of São João
iBaptista de Ajudá on the coast of Dahomey, was also under Portuguese rule. In
iaddition, Portugal still ruled the Asian territories of Portuguese India,
iPortuguese Timor and Portuguese Macau.
i
iOn 1 February 1908, King Dom Carlos I of Portugal and his heir apparent and
ihis eldest son, Prince Royal Dom Luís Filipe, Duke of Braganza, were
iassassinated in Lisbon in the Terreiro do Paço by two Portuguese republican
iactivist revolutionaries, Alfredo Luís da Costa and Manuel Buíça. Under his
irule, Portugal had been declared bankrupt twice – first on 14 June 1892, and
ithen again on 10 May 1902 – causing social turmoil, economic disturbances,
iangry protests, revolts and criticism of the monarchy. His second and
iyoungest
ison, Manuel II of Portugal, became the new king, but was eventually
ioverthrown
iby the 5 October 1910 Portuguese republican revolution, which abolished the
imonarchy and installed a republican government in Portugal, causing him and
ihis royal family to flee into exile in London, England.
i
iThe new republic had many problems. Portugal had 45 different governments in
ijust 15 years. During World War 1 (1914–1918), Portugal helped the Allies
ifight the Central Powers, however the war hurt its weak economy. Political
iinstability and economic weaknesses were fertile ground for chaos and unrest
iduring the First Portuguese Republic. These conditions would lead to the
ifailed Monarchy of the North, 28 May 1926 coup d'état, and the creation of
ithe
iNational Dictatorship (Ditadura Nacional). This in turn led to the
iestablishment of the right-wing dictatorship of the Estado Novo under António
ide Oliveira Salazar in 1933.
i
iPortugal remained neutral in World War II. From the 1940s to the 1960s,
iPortugal was a founding member of NATO, OECD and the European Free Trade
iAssociation (EFTA). Gradually, new economic development projects and
irelocation of mainland Portuguese citizens into the overseas provinces in
iAfrica were initiated, with Angola and Mozambique, as the largest and richest
ioverseas territories, being the main targets of those initiatives. These
iactions were used to affirm Portugal's status as a transcontinental nation
iand
inot as a colonial empire.
i
iAfter India attained independence in 1947, pro-Indian residents of Dadra and
iNagar Haveli, with the support of the Indian government and the help of
ipro-independence organizations, separated the territories of Dadra and Nagar
iHaveli from Portuguese rule in 1954.[98] In 1961, Fort of São João Baptista
ide
iAjudá's annexation by the Republic of Dahomey was the start of a process that
iled to the final dissolution of the centuries-old Portuguese Empire.
i
iAccording to the census of 1921 São João Baptista de Ajudá had five
iinhabitants and, at the moment of the ultimatum by the Dahomey Government, it
ihad only two inhabitants representing Portuguese Sovereignty.
i
iAnother forcible retreat from overseas territories occurred in December 1961
iwhen Portugal refused to relinquish the territories of Goa, Daman and Diu in
iIndia. As a result, the Portuguese army and navy were involved in armed
iconflict in its colony of Portuguese India against the Indian Armed Forces.
i
iThe operations resulted in the defeat and surrender of the limited Portuguese
idefensive garrison, which was forced to surrender to a much larger military
iforce. The outcome was the loss of the remaining Portuguese territories in
ithe
iIndian subcontinent. The Portuguese regime refused to recognize Indian
isovereignty over the annexed territories, which continued to be represented
iin
iPortugal's National Assembly until the military coup of 1974.
i
iAlso in the early 1960s, independence movements in the Portuguese overseas
iprovinces of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea in Africa, resulted in the
iPortuguese Colonial War (1961–1974).
i
iThe war lasted thirteen years, mobilized around 1.4 million men for military
ior for civilian support service,[99] and led to big casualties from military
ito civilians, plus evacuations of thousands from war zones.
i
iThroughout the colonial war period Portugal had to deal with increasing
idissent, arms embargoes and other punitive sanctions imposed by most of the
iinternational community.
i
iHowever, the authoritarian and conservative Estado Novo regime, first
iinstalled and governed by António de Oliveira Salazar and from 1968 onwards
iled by Marcelo Caetano, tried to preserve a vast centuries-long
iintercontinental empire with a total area of 2,168,071 km2 (837,097 sq
imi).[100]
i
iThe Portuguese government and army resisted the decolonization of its
ioverseas territories until April 1974, when a left-wing military coup in
iLisbon, known as the Carnation Revolution, led the way for the independence
iof
ithe overseas territories in Africa and Asia, as well as for the restoration
iof
idemocracy after two years of a transitional period known as PREC (Processo
iRevolucionário Em Curso). This period was characterized by social turmoil and
ipower disputes between left- and right-wing political forces. By the summer
iof
i1975, the tension between these was so high, that the country was on the
iverge
iof civil war. The forces connected to the extreme left-wing launched a
ifurther
icoup d'état on 25 November but the Group of Nine, a moderate military
ifaction,
iimmediately initiated a counter-coup. The main episode of this confrontation
iwas the successful assault on the barracks of the left-wing dominated
iMilitary
iPolice Regiment by the moderate forces of the Commando Regiment, resulting in
ithree soldiers killed in action.
i
iThe Group of Nine emerged victorious, thus preventing the establishment of a
icommunist state in Portugal and ending the period of political instability in
ithe country. The retreat from the overseas territories and the acceptance of
iits independence terms by Portuguese head representatives for overseas
inegotiations, which would create independent states in 1975, prompted a mass
iexodus of Portuguese citizens from Portugal's African territories (mostly
ifrom
iPortuguese Angola and Mozambique).[101][102]
i
iOver one million Portuguese refugees fled the former Portuguese provinces as
iwhite settlers were usually not considered part of the new identities of the
iformer Portuguese colonies in Africa and Asia. Mário Soares and António de
iAlmeida Santos were charged with organizing the independence of Portugal's
ioverseas territories. By 1975, all the Portuguese African territories were
iindependent and Portugal held its first democratic elections in 50 years.
i
iPortugal continued to be governed by a Junta de Salvação Nacional until the
iPortuguese legislative election of 1976. It was won by the Portuguese
iSocialist Party (PS) and Mário Soares, its leader, became Prime Minister of
ithe 1st Constitutional Government on 23 July. Mário Soares would be Prime
iMinister from 1976 to 1978 and again from 1983 to 1985. In this capacity
iSoares tried to resume the economic growth and development record that had
ibeen achieved before the Carnation Revolution, during the last decade of the
iprevious regime. He initiated the process of accession to the European
iEconomic Community (EEC) by starting accession negotiations as early as 1977.
i
iAfter the transition to democracy, Portugal bounced between socialism and
iadherence to the neoliberal model. Land reform and nationalizations were
ienforced; the Portuguese Constitution (approved in 1976) was rewritten in
iorder to accommodate socialist and communist principles. Until the
iconstitutional revisions of 1982 and 1989, the constitution was a document
iwith numerous references to socialism, the rights of workers, and the
idesirability of a socialist economy. Portugal's economic situation after the
irevolution obliged the government to pursue International Monetary Fund
i(IMF)-monitored stabilization programmes in 1977–78 and 1983–85.
i
iIn 1986, Portugal, along with Spain, joined the European Economic Community
i(EEC) that later became the European Union (EU). In the following years
iPortugal's economy progressed considerably as a result of EEC/EU structural
iand cohesion funds and Portuguese companies' easier access to foreign
imarkets.
i
iPortugal's last overseas and Asian colonial territory, Macau, was peacefully
ihanded over to the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 20 December 1999,
iunder
ithe 1987 joint declaration that set the terms for Macau's handover from
iPortugal to the PRC. In 2002, the independence of East Timor (Asia) was
iformally recognized by Portugal, after an incomplete decolonization process
ithat was started in 1975 because of the Carnation Revolution, but interrupted
iby an Indonesian armed invasion and occupation.
i
iOn 26 March 1995, Portugal started to implement Schengen Area rules,
ieliminating border controls with other Schengen members while simultaneously
istrengthening border controls with non-member states. In 1996 the country was
ia co-founder of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)
iheadquartered in Lisbon. In 1996, Jorge Sampaio became president. He won
ire-election in January 2001. Expo '98 took place in Portugal and in 1999 it
iwas one of the founding countries of the euro and the eurozone. On 5 July
i2004, José Manuel Barroso, then Prime Minister of Portugal, was nominated
iPresident of the European Commission, the most powerful office in the
iEuropean
iUnion. On 1 December 2009, the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force, after it
ihad been signed by the European Union member states on 13 December 2007 in
ithe
iJerónimos Monastery, in Lisbon, enhancing the efficiency and democratic
ilegitimacy of the Union and improving the coherence of its action. Ireland
iwas
ithe only EU state to hold a democratic referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. It
iwas
iinitially rejected by voters in 2008.
i
iEconomic disruption and an unsustainable growth in government debt during the
ifinancial crisis of 2007–2008 led the country to negotiate in 2011 with the
iIMF and the European Union, through the European Financial Stability
iMechanism
i(EFSM) and the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), a loan to help
ithe country stabilize its finances.
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iPortugal occupies an area on the Iberian Peninsula (referred to as the
icontinent by most Portuguese) and two archipelagos in the Atlantic Ocean:
iMadeira and the Azores. It lies between latitudes 30° and 42° N, and
ilongitudes 32° and 6° W.
i
iMainland Portugal is split by its main river, the Tagus, that flows from
iSpain and disgorges in the Tagus Estuary at Lisbon, before escaping into the
iAtlantic. The northern landscape is mountainous towards the interior with
iseveral plateaus indented by river valleys, whereas the south, including the
iAlgarve and the Alentejo regions, is characterized by rolling plains.[103]
i
iPortugal's highest peak is the similarly named Mount Pico on the island of
iPico in the Azores. This ancient volcano, with a height of 2,351 m (7,713 ft)
iis an iconic symbol of the Azores. Serra da Estrela on the mainland (the
isummit being 1,991 m (6,532 ft) above sea level) is an important seasonal
iattraction for skiers and winter sports enthusiasts.
i
iThe archipelagos of Madeira and the Azores are scattered within the Atlantic
iOcean: the Azores straddling the Mid-Atlantic Ridge on a tectonic triple
ijunction, and Madeira along a range formed by in-plate hotspot geology.
iGeologically, these islands were formed by volcanic and seismic events. The
ilast terrestrial volcanic eruption occurred in 1957–58 (Capelinhos) and minor
iearthquakes occur sporadically, usually of low intensity.
i
iThe exclusive economic zone, a sea zone over which the Portuguese have
ispecial rights in exploration and use of marine resources, covers an area of
i1,727,408 km2 (666,956 sq mi). This is the 3rd largest exclusive economic
izone
iof the European Union and the 20th largest in the world.[104]
i
iPortugal is mainly characterized by a Mediterranean climate (Csa in the
iSouth, central interior, and the Douro river valley; Csb in the North,
iCentral
iwest and Vicentine Coast),[105] temperate maritime climate (Cfb) in the
imainland north-western highlands and mountains, and in some high altitude
izones of the Azorean islands; a semi-arid climate in certain parts of the
iBeja
iDistrict far south (BSk) and in Porto Santo Island (BSh), a warm desert
iclimate (BWh) in the Selvagens Islands and a humid subtropical climate in the
iwestern Azores (Cfa), according to the Köppen-Geiger Climate Classification.
iIt is one of the warmest countries in Europe: the annual average temperature
iin mainland Portugal varies from 10–12 °C (50.0–53.6 °F) in the mountainous
iinterior north to 16–18 °C (60.8–64.4 °F) in the south and on the Guadiana
iriver basin. There are however, variations from the highlands to the
ilowlands:
iSpanish biologist Salvador Rivas Martinez presents several different
ibioclimatic zones for Portugal.[106] The Algarve, separated from the Alentejo
iregion by mountains reaching up to 900 metres (3,000 ft) in Alto da Fóia, has
ia climate similar to that of the southern coastal areas of Spain or Southwest
iAustralia.
i
iAnnual average rainfall in the mainland varies from just over 3,200 mm (126.0
iin) on the Peneda-Gerês National Park to less than 500 mm (19.7 in) in
isouthern parts of Alentejo. Mount Pico is recognized as receiving the largest
iannual rainfall (over 6,250 mm (246.1 in) per year) in Portugal, according to
iInstituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera.
i
iIn some areas, such as the Guadiana basin, annual diurnal average
itemperatures can be as high as 26 °C (79 °F), and summer's highest
itemperatures are routinely over 40 °C (104 °F). The record high of 47.4 °C
i(117.3 °F) was recorded in Amareleja, although this might not be the hottest
ispot in summer, according to satellite readings.[107][108]
i
iSnowfalls occur regularly in the winter in the interior North and Centre of
ithe country in districts such as Guarda, Bragança, Viseu and Vila Real,
iparticularly on the mountains. In winter, temperatures may drop below −10.0
i°C
i(14.0 °F), particularly in Serra da Estrela, Serra do Gerês, Serra do Marão
iand Serra de Montesinho. In these places snow can fall any time from October
ito May. In the South of the country snowfalls are rare but still occur in the
ihighest elevations. While the official absolute minimum by IPMA is −16.0 °C
i(3.2 °F) in Penhas da Saúde and Miranda do Douro, lower temperatures have
ibeen
irecorded, such as −17.5 °C (0.5 °F) by Bragança Polytechnic Institute in the
ioutskirts of the city in 1983, and below −20.0 °C (−4.0 °F) in Serra da
iEstrela.
i
iContinental Portugal receives around 2,300 to 3,200 hours of sunshine a year,
ian average of 4–6 hours in winter and 10–12 hours in the summer, with higher
ivalues in the south-east, south-west and the Algarve coast and lower in the
inorth-west. Insolation values are lower in the archipelagos, with around
i1,600
ihours in the humid Flores Island and around 2,300 hours in the island of
iMadeira and Porto Santo. Insolation in the Selvagens is thought to be higher
idue to weaker orographic lift and their relative proximity to the Sahara
iDesert.
i
iPortugal's central west and southwest coasts have an extreme ocean seasonal
ilag, sea temperatures are warmer in October than in July and are their
icoldest
iin March. The average sea surface temperature on the west coast of mainland
iPortugal varies from 14–16 °C (57.2–60.8 °F) in January−March to 19–21 °C
i(66.2–69.8 °F) in August−October while on the south coast it ranges from 16
i°C
i(60.8 °F) in January−March and rises in the summer to about 22–23 °C
i(71.6–73.4 °F), occasionally reaching 26 °C (78.8 °F).[109] In the Azores,
iaround 16 °C (60.8 °F) in February−April to 22–24 °C (71.6–75.2 °F) in
iJuly−September,[110] and in Madeira, around 18 °C (64.4 °F) in February−April
ito 23–24 °C (73.4–75.2 °F) in August−October.[111]
i
iBoth the archipelagos of the Azores and Madeira have a subtropical climate,
ialthough variations between islands exist, making weather predictions very
idifficult (owing to rough topography). The Madeira and Azorean archipelagos
ihave a narrower temperature range, with annual average temperatures exceeding
i20 °C (68 °F) in some parts of the coast (according to the Portuguese
iMeteorological Institute). Some islands in Azores do have drier months in the
isummer. Consequently, the islands of the Azores have been identified as
ihaving
ia Mediterranean climate (both Csa and Csb types), while some islands (such as
iFlores or Corvo) are classified as Humid subtropical (Cfa), transitioning
iinto
ian Oceanic climate (Cfb) at higher altitudes, according to Köppen-Geiger
iclassification.
i
iPorto Santo Island in Madeira has a warm semi-arid climate (BSh). The Savage
iIslands, which are part of the regional territory of Madeira and a nature
ireserve are unique in being classified as a desert climate (BWh) with an
iannual average rainfall of approximately 150 mm (5.9 in). The sea surface
itemperature in these islands varies from 18.5 °C (65.3 °F) in winter to 23–24
i°C (73.4–75.2 °F) in the summer occasionally reaching 25 °C (77.0
i°F).[citation needed]
i
iPortugal is located on the Mediterranean Basin, the third most diverse
ihotspot of flora in the world.[112] Due to its geographical and climatic
icontext - between the Atlantic and Mediterranean - Portugal has a high level
iof biodiversity on land and at sea. It is home to six terrestrial ecoregions:
iAzores temperate mixed forests, Cantabrian mixed forests, Madeira evergreen
iforests, Iberian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests, Northwest Iberian
imontane forests, and Southwest Iberian Mediterranean sclerophyllous and mixed
iforests.[113] Over 22% of its land area is included in the Natura 2000
inetwork, including 62 special conservation areas and 88 types of protected
ilandscape natural habitats.[114][112]
i
iEucalyptus (non-native, commercial plantations), cork oak and maritime pine
itogether make up 71% of the total forested area of continental Portugal,
ifollowed by the holm oak, the stone pine, the other oak trees (Q. robur, Q.
ifaginea and Q. pyrenaica) and the sweet chestnut, respectively.[115] In
iMadeira, laurisilva (recognized as a World Heritage Site) dominates the
ilandscape, especially on the northern slope. The predominant species in this
iforest include Laurus novocanariensis, Apollonias barbujana, Ocotea foetens
iand Persea indica. Before human occupation the Azores were also rich in dense
ilaurisilva forests, today these native forests are undermined by the
iintroduced Pittosporum undulatum and Cryptomeria japonica.[116][117] There
ihave been several projects aimed to recover the Laurisilva present in the
iAzores.[118] Remnants of these laurisilva forests are also present in
icontinental Portugal with its few living testimonies Laurus nobilis, Prunus
ilusitanica, Arbutus unedo, Myrica faya and Rhododendron ponticum.[119]
i
iThese geographical and climatic conditions facilitate the introduction of
iexotic species that later turn to be invasive and destructive to the native
ihabitats. Around 20% of the total number of extant species in continental
iPortugal are exotic.[120] In Madeira, around 36%[121] and in the Azores,
iaround 70% species are exotic.[122][123] Due to this, Portugal was placed
i168th globally out of 172 countries on the Forest Landscape Integrity Index
iin
i2019.[124]
i
iPortugal is the second country in Europe with the highest number of
ithreatened animal and plant species (488 as of 2020).[125][126]
i
iPortugal as a whole is an important stopover for migratory bird species: the
isouthern marshes of the eastern Algarve (Ria Formosa, Castro Marim) and the
iLisbon Region (Tagus Estuary, Sado Estuary) hosting various aquatic bird
ispecies, the Bonelli's eagle and Egyptian vulture on the northern valleys of
ithe Douro International, the black stork and griffon vulture on the Tagus
iInternational, the seabird sanctuaries of the Savage Islands and Berlengas
iand
ithe highlands of Madeira and São Miguel all represent the great diversity of
iwild avian species (around 450 in continental Portugal), not only migratory
ibut also endemic (e.g. trocaz pigeon, Azores bullfinch) or exotic (crested
imyna, pin-tailed whydah).[127][128]
i
iThe large mammalian species of Portugal (the fallow deer, red deer, roe deer,
iIberian ibex, wild boar, red fox, Iberian wolf and Iberian lynx) were once
iwidespread throughout the country, but intense hunting, habitat degradation
iand growing pressure from agriculture and livestock reduced population
inumbers
ion a large scale in the 19th and early 20th century, others, such as the
iPortuguese ibex were even led to extinction. Today, these animals are
ire-expanding their native range.[129][130] Smaller mammals include the red
isquirrel, European badger, Eurasian otter, Egyptian mongoose, Granada hare,
iEuropean rabbit, common genet, European wildcat, among others.[130]
i
iDue to their isolated location, the volcanic islands of the Azores, Madeira
iand Salvages, part of Macaronesia, have many endemic species that have
ievolved
iindependently from their European, African and occasionally American
irelatives.
i
iThe Portuguese west coast is part of the four major Eastern Boundary
iUpwelling Systems of the ocean. This seasonal upwelling system typically seen
iduring the summer months brings cooler, nutrient rich water up to the sea
isurface promoting phytoplankton growth, zooplankton development and the
isubsequent rich diversity in pelagic fish and other marine
iinvertebrates.[131]
i
iThis, adding to its large EEZ makes Portugal one of the largest per capita
ifish-consumers in the world.[132] Sardines (Sardina pilchardus) and horse
imackerel (Trachurus trachurus) are collected in the thousands every
iyear.[133]
iwhile blue whiting, monkfish, Atlantic cod, cephalopods, skates or any other
iform of seafood are traditionally fished in the local coastal villages.[134]
iThis upwelling also allows Portugal to have kelp forests which are otherwise
ivery uncommon or non-existent on the Mediterranean.[135]
i
i73% of the freshwater fish occurring in the Iberian Peninsula are endemic,
ithe largest out of any region in Europe.[136] Many of these endemic species
iare concentrated in bodies of water of the central western region (one
iexclusively endemic), these and other bodies of water throughout the
iPeninsula
iare mostly temporary and prone to drought every year, placing most of these
ispecies under Threatened status.[137]
i
iAround 24[138] to 28[139] species of cetacean roam through the Azores, making
iit one of four places in the world where most species of this infraorder
ioccur.[138] Starting in the mid-19th century and ceasing in 1984, whaling
i(especially of sperm whale) heavily exploited this diversity. Beginning in
ithe
iearly 90s, whale watching quickly grew to popularity and is now one of the
imain economic activities in the Portuguese archipelago.[140][141]
i
iSome protected areas in Portugal other than the ones previously mentioned
iinclude: the Serras de Aire e Candeeiros with its limestone formations,
ipaleontological history and great diversity in bats and orchids,[142] the
iSouthwest Alentejo and Vicentine Coast Natural Park with its well preserved,
iwild coastline.[143] the Montesinho Natural Park which hosts some of the only
ipopulations of Iberian wolf and recent sightings of Iberian brown bear,[144]
iwhich had been considered extinct in the country; among other species.
i
i===== Government and politics =====
i
iPortugal has been a semi-presidential representative democratic republic
isince the ratification of the Constitution of 1976, with Lisbon, the nation's
ilargest city, as its capital.[145] The Constitution grants the division or
iseparation of powers among four "sovereignty bodies" [pt]: the President of
ithe Republic, the Government, the Assembly of the Republic and the
iCourts.[146]
i
iThe President, who is elected to a five-year term, has an executive role: the
icurrent President is Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa. The Assembly of the Republic is
ia single chamber parliament composed of a maximum of 230 deputies elected for
ia four-year term. The Government is headed by the Prime Minister (currently
iAntónio Costa) and includes Ministers and Secretaries of State. The Courts
iare
iorganized into several levels, among the judicial, administrative and fiscal
ibranches. The Supreme Courts are institutions of last resort/appeal. A
ithirteen-member Constitutional Court oversees the constitutionality of the
ilaws.
i
iPortugal operates a multi-party system of competitive legislatures/local
iadministrative governments at the national, regional and local levels. The
iAssembly of the Republic, Regional Assemblies and local municipalities and
iparishes, are dominated by two political parties, the Socialist Party and the
iSocial Democratic Party, in addition to Enough, the Liberal Initiative, the
iUnitary Democratic Coalition (Portuguese Communist Party and Ecologist Party
i"The Greens") and the Left Bloc, which garner between 5 and 15% of the vote
iregularly.
i
iThe Head of State of Portugal is the President of the Republic, elected to a
ifive-year term by direct, universal suffrage. Presidential powers include the
iappointment of the Prime Minister and the other members of the Government
i(where the President takes into account the results of legislative
ielections);
idismissing the Prime Minister; dissolving the Assembly of the Republic (to
icall early elections); vetoing legislation (which may be overridden by the
iAssembly); and declaring a state of war or siege. The President has also
isupervisory and reserve powers and is the ex officio Commander-in-Chief of
ithe
iArmed Forces.
i
iThe President is advised on issues of importance by the Council of State,
iwhich is composed of six senior civilian officers, any former Presidents
ielected under the 1976 Constitution, five members chosen by the Assembly, and
ifive selected by the president.
i
iThe Government is headed by the presidentially appointed Prime Minister, also
iincluding one or more Deputy Prime Ministers, Ministers, Secretaries of State
iand Under-Secretaries of State.
i
iThe Government is both the organ of sovereignty that conducts the general
ipolitics of the country and the superior body of the public administration.
i
iIt has essentially Executive powers, but has also limited legislative powers.
iThe Government can legislate about its own organization, about areas covered
iby legislative authorizations conceded by the Assembly of the Republic and
iabout the specific regulation of generalist laws issued by the Assembly.
i
iThe Council of Ministers – under the presidency of the Prime Minister (or the
iPresident of Portugal at the latter's request) and the Ministers (may also
iinclude one or more Deputy Prime Ministers) – acts as the cabinet. Each
igovernment is required to define the broad outline of its policies in a
iprogramme, and present it to the Assembly for a mandatory period of debate.
iThe failure of the Assembly to reject the government programme by an absolute
imajority of deputies confirms the cabinet in office.
i
iThe Assembly of the Republic, in Lisbon, is the national parliament of
iPortugal. It is the main legislative body, although the Government also has
ilimited legislative powers.
i
iThe Assembly of the Republic is a unicameral body composed of up to 230
ideputies. Elected by universal suffrage according to a system of closed
iparty-list proportional representation, deputies serve four-year terms of
ioffice, unless the President dissolves the Assembly and calls for new
ielections.
i
iCurrently the Government (PS) has an absolute majority of seats in
iParliament. The PSD is the main opposition party, alongside Chega, Liberal
iInitiative, BE, PCP, PAN and Livre.
i
iA member state of the United Nations since 1955, Portugal is also a founding
imember of NATO (1949), OECD (1961) and EFTA (1960); it left the last in 1986
ito join the European Economic Community, which became the European Union in
i1993.
i
iIn 1996, Portugal co-founded the Community of Portuguese Language Countries
i(CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, an international
iorganization and political association of Lusophone nations across four
icontinents, where Portuguese is an official language. The global headquarters
iof the CPLP is in Penafiel Palace, in Lisbon.
i
iAntónio Guterres, who has served as Prime Minister of Portugal from 1995 to
i2002 and UN High Commissioner for Refugees from 2005 to 2015, assumed the
ipost
iof UN Secretary-General on 1 January 2017; making him the first
iSecretary-General from Western Europe since Kurt Waldheim of Austria
i(1972–1981), the first former head of government to become Secretary-General
iand the first Secretary-General born after the establishment of the United
iNations on 26 June 1945.
i
iIn addition, Portugal was a full member of the Latin Union (1983) and the
iOrganization of Ibero-American States (1949). It has a friendship alliance
iand
idual citizenship treaty with its former colony, Brazil. Portugal and the
iUnited Kingdom share the world's oldest active military accord through their
iAnglo-Portuguese Alliance (Treaty of Windsor), which was signed in 1373.
i
iThere are two international territorial disputes, both with Spain:
i
iThe armed forces have three branches: Navy, Army and Air Force. They serve
iprimarily as a self-defence force whose mission is to protect the territorial
iintegrity of the country and provide humanitarian assistance and security at
ihome and abroad. As of 2008[update], the three branches numbered 39,200
iactive
ipersonnel including 7,500 women. Portuguese military expenditure in 2009 was
i5
ibillion US$,[154] representing 2.1 per cent of GDP. Military conscription was
iabolished in 2004. The minimum age for voluntary recruitment is 18 years.
i
iThe Army (21,000 personnel) comprises three brigades and other small units.
iAn infantry brigade (mainly equipped with Pandur II APC), a mechanized
ibrigade
i(mainly equipped with Leopard 2 A6 tanks and M113 APC) and a Rapid Reaction
iBrigade (consisting of paratroopers, commandos and rangers). The Navy (10,700
ipersonnel, of which 1,580 are marines), the world's oldest surviving naval
iforce, has five frigates, seven corvettes, two submarines, and 28 patrol and
iauxiliary vessels. The Air Force (7,500 personnel) has the Lockheed F-16
iFighting Falcon as the main combat aircraft.
i
iIn addition to the three branches of the armed forces, there is the National
iRepublican Guard, a security force subject to military law and organization
i(gendarmerie) comprising 25,000 personnel. This force is under the authority
iof both the Defence and the Interior Ministry. It has provided detachments
ifor
iparticipation in international operations in Iraq and East Timor.
i
iThe United States maintains a military presence with 770 troops in the Lajes
iAir Base at Terceira Island, in the Azores. The Allied Joint Force Command
iLisbon (JFC Lisbon) – one of the three main subdivisions of NATO's Allied
iCommand Operations – it is based in Oeiras, near Lisbon.
i
iIn the 20th century, Portugal engaged in two major conflicts: World War I and
ithe Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974). After the end of the Portuguese
iEmpire in 1975, the Portuguese Armed Forces have participated in peacekeeping
imissions in East Timor, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq
i(Nasiriyah), Lebanon, Mali[155] and Central African Republic.[156] Portugal
ialso conducted several independent unilateral military operations abroad, as
iwere the cases of the interventions of the Portuguese Armed Forces in Angola
iin 1992 and in Guinea-Bissau in 1998 with the main objectives of protecting
iand withdrawing of Portuguese and foreign citizens threatened by local civil
iconflicts.
i
iThe Portuguese legal system is part of the civil law legal system, also
icalled the continental family legal system. The main laws include the
iConstitution (1976, as amended), the Portuguese Civil Code (1966, as amended)
iand the Penal Code of Portugal (1982, as amended). Other relevant laws are
ithe
iCommercial Code (1888, as amended) and the Civil Procedure Code (1961, as
iamended).
i
iThe supreme national courts are the Supreme Court of Justice and the
iConstitutional Court. The Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General of
ithe Republic, constitutes the independent body of public prosecutors.
i
iPortuguese laws were applied in the former colonies and territories and
icontinue to be major influences for those countries.
i
iPortugal was the first country in the world to abolish life imprisonment (in
i1884) and was one of the first countries to abolish the death penalty.
iMaximum
iprison sentences are limited to 25 years.
i
iDrug decriminalisation was declared in 2001, making Portugal the first
icountry in the world to allow usage and personal possession of all common
idrugs. Portugal decriminalized possession of effectively all drugs that are
istill illegal in other developed nations, including cannabis, cocaine,
iheroin,
iand LSD. While possession is legal, trafficking and possession of more than
i"10 days worth of personal use" are still punishable by jail time and fines.
iPeople caught with small amounts of any drug are given the choice to go to a
irehab facility, and may refuse treatment without consequences. Despite
icriticism from other European nations, who stated Portugal's drug consumption
iwould tremendously increase, overall drug use has declined along with the
inumber of HIV infection cases, which had dropped 50 percent by 2009. Drug use
iamong 16- to 18-year-olds also declined, however the use of marijuana rose
ionly slightly among that age group.[157][158][159]
i
iLGBTI rights have increased substantially in the past years. On 27 August
i2003, Portugal added the anti-discrimination employment law on the basis of
isexual orientation.[160] At 24 July 2004, sexual orientation was added to the
iConstitution as part of the protected from discrimination
icharacteristics.[161] On 31 May 2010, Portugal became the sixth country in
iEurope and the eighth country in the world to legally recognize same-sex
imarriage at the national level. The law came into force on 5 June 2010.[162]
iSame-sex adoption has been allowed since 1 March 2016[163] as is female
isame-sex couple access to medically assisted reproduction since 13 May
i2016.[164] This bill was adopted by the Parliament and signed by President
iMarcelo Rebelo de Sousa.[165][166][167] As of January 2017 the New Law of
iGender Identity,[168] simplified the legal process of gender and name change
ifor transgender people, making it easier for minors to change their sex
imarker
iin legal documents.[169] At August 2018, the right to gender identity and
igender expression self-determination became protected, intersex minors became
iprotected by law from unnecessary medical procedures "until the minor gender
iidentity manifests" and the right of protection from discrimination on the
ibasis of sex characteristics also became protected by the same law.[170]
i
iEuthanasia has been legalised in Portugal, after several reviews in
iparliament. Nationals over 18 who are terminally ill and in extreme suffering
ibut who can still decide to, have the legal right to request for assisted
idying. However, non-residents are not allowed to request for assisted
ieuthanasia in Portugal.[171] Only a small number of other countries like
iBelgium, Colombia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain currently
iallow
ifor assisted dying.[172]
i
iPortugal's main police organizations are the Guarda Nacional Republicana –
iGNR (National Republican Guard), a gendarmerie; the Polícia de Segurança
iPública – PSP (Public Security Police), a civilian police force who work in
iurban areas; and the Polícia Judiciária – PJ (Judicial Police), a highly
ispecialized criminal investigation police that is overseen by the Public
iMinistry.
i
iPortugal has 49 correctional facilities in total run by the Ministry of
iJustice. They include seventeen central prisons, four special prisons,
itwenty-seven regional prisons, and one 'Cadeia de Apoio' (Support Detention
iCentre).[173] As of 1 January 2021[update], their current prison population
iis
iabout 11,234 inmates, which comes to about 0.11% of their entire
ipopulation.[174] Their incarceration rate has been on the rise since 2010,
iwith a 15% increase over the past eight years.[174]
i
iAdministratively, Portugal is divided into 308 municipalities (Portuguese:
imunicípios or concelhos), which after a reform in 2013 are subdivided into
i3,092 civil parishes (Portuguese: freguesia). Operationally, the municipality
iand civil parish, along with the national government, are the only legally
ilocal administrative units identified by the government of Portugal (for
iexample, cities, towns or villages have no standing in law, although may be
iused as catchment for the defining services).
i
iFor statistical purposes the Portuguese government also identifies
iNomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), inter-municipal
icommunities and informally, the district system, used until European
iintegration (and being phased-out by the national government).[original
iresearch?] Continental Portugal is agglomerated into 18 districts, while the
iarchipelagos of the Azores and Madeira are governed as autonomous regions;
ithe
ilargest units, established since 1976, are either mainland Portugal
i(Portuguese: Portugal Continental) and the autonomous regions of Portugal
i(Azores and Madeira).
i
iThe 18 districts of mainland Portugal are: Aveiro, Beja, Braga, Bragança,
iCastelo Branco, Coimbra, Évora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria, Lisbon, Portalegre,
iPorto, Santarém, Setúbal, Viana do Castelo, Vila Real and Viseu – each
idistrict takes the name of the district capital.
i
iWithin the European Union NUTS system, Portugal is divided into seven
iregions: the Azores, Alentejo, Algarve, Centro, Lisboa, Madeira and Norte,
iand
iwith the exception of the Azores and Madeira, NUTS areas are subdivided into
i28 subregions.
i
iThe Portuguese government is heavily indebted, and received a 78-billion-euro
ibailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in May
i2011.[176] The ratio of Portugal's debt to its overall economy, was 107 per
icent when it received the bailout.[176] As part of the deal, the country
iagreed to cut its budget deficit from 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2010 to 5.9 per
icent in 2011, 4.5 per cent in 2012 and 3 per cent in 2013.[177]
i
iAfter the bailout was announced, the Portuguese government headed by Pedro
iPassos Coelho managed to implement measures with the intention of improving
ithe state's financial situation, including tax hikes, a freeze of civil
iservice-related lower-wages and cuts of higher-wages by 14.3%, on top of the
igovernment's spending cuts. The Portuguese government also agreed to
ieliminate
iits golden share in Portugal Telecom which gave it veto power over vital
idecisions.[178][179] In 2012, all public servants had already seen an average
iwage cut of 20% relative to their 2010 baseline, with cuts reaching 25% for
ithose earning more than 1,500 euro per month.[180]
i
iThe IMF, the European Commission (EC) and the European Central Bank (ECB)
isaid in September 2012 that Portugal's debt would peak at 124 per cent of
igross domestic product in 2014.[181] The IMF previously said in July 2012
ithat
iPortugal's debt would peak at about 118.5 per cent of GDP in 2013.[181] In
iSeptember 2013, the Portuguese Government reviewed again the public debt of
iPortugal for 2013 to 127.8 per cent, after a peak of 130.9 per cent in that
imonth.[182]
i
iA report released in January 2011 by the Diário de Notícias[183] and
ipublished in Portugal by Gradiva, had demonstrated that in the period between
ithe Carnation Revolution in 1974 and 2010, the democratic Portuguese Republic
igovernments encouraged over-expenditure and investment bubbles through
iunclear
iPublic–private partnerships and funding of numerous ineffective and
iunnecessary external consultancy and advisory of committees and firms. This
iallowed considerable slippage in state-managed public works and inflated top
imanagement and head officer bonuses and wages. Persistent and lasting
irecruitment policies boosted the number of redundant public servants. Risky
icredit, public debt creation, and European structural and cohesion funds were
imismanaged across almost four decades.[184]
i
iTwo Portuguese banks, Banco Português de Negócios (BPN) and Banco Privado
iPortuguês (BPP), had been accumulating losses for years due to bad
iinvestments, embezzlement and accounting fraud. The case of BPN was
iparticularly serious because of its size, market share, and the political
iimplications – Portugal's then President, Cavaco Silva and some of his
ipolitical allies, maintained personal and business relationships with the
ibank
iand its CEO, who was eventually charged and arrested for fraud and other
icrimes.[185][186][187] On grounds of avoiding a potentially serious financial
icrisis in the Portuguese economy, the Portuguese government decided to give
ithem a bailout, eventually at a future loss to taxpayers and to the
iPortuguese
ipeople in general.
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iPortugal is a developed and a high-income country,[188][189][190] it ranks
ihighly in peacefulness, democracy,[191] press freedom, stability, social
iprogress, prosperity and English proficiency. With a GDP per capita of 77% of
ithe EU27 average in 2022 (an increase from 75% in 2021)[192] and a HDI of
i0.866 (the 38th highest in the world, just behind Saudi Arabia’s) in
i2021.[193][194] Portugal has been a net beneficiary to the European Union
ibudget since it joined the union, then known as EEC, in
i1986.[195][196][197][198]
i
iBy the end of 2022, Portugal's GDP (PPP) was $42,341 per capita, according to
iOECD's report.[199] By 2021, Portugal had the 4th lowest GDP per capita (PPP)
iof the eurozone out of 19 members, and the 8th lowest of the European Union
iout of 27 member-states.[200] Several former economically disadvantaged
iCommunist Bloc countries which in the meanwhile had become Eastern European
imember-states of the EU, had reached or surpassed Portugal in terms of GDP
i(PPP) per capita around this date.[201][202] In 2021, labour productivity had
ifallen to the fifth lowest among the 27 member-states of the European Union
i(EU) and was 35% lower than the EU average, with only Latvia, Poland,
iBulgaria, and Greece being lower to Portugal in that parameter.[203][204] In
i2022, it had fallen to the fourth lowest position.[205]
i
iThe national currency of Portugal is the euro (€), which replaced the
iPortuguese Escudo in 2002, and the country was one of the original member
istates of the eurozone. Portugal's central bank is the Banco de Portugal, an
iintegral part of the European System of Central Banks. Most industries,
ibusinesses and financial institutions are concentrated in the Lisbon and
iPorto
imetropolitan areas – the Setúbal, Aveiro, Braga, Coimbra, Leiria and Faro
idistricts are the biggest economic centres outside these two main areas.
iAccording to World Travel Awards, Portugal was Europe's Leading Golf
iDestination in 2012 and 2013.[206][207]
i
iSince the Carnation Revolution of 1974, which culminated in the end of one of
iPortugal's most notable phases of economic expansion (that started in the
i1960s),[208] a significant change has occurred in the nation's annual
ieconomic
igrowth.[209] After the turmoil of the 1974 revolution and the PREC period,
iPortugal tried to adapt to a changing modern global economy, a process that
icontinues in 2013. Since the 1990s, Portugal's public consumption-based
ieconomic development model has been slowly changing to a system that is
ifocused on exports, private investment and the development of the high-tech
isector. Consequently, business services have overtaken more traditional
iindustries such as textiles, clothing, footwear and cork (Portugal is the
iworld's leading cork producer),[210] wood products and beverages.[211]
i
iIn the second decade of the 21st century, the Portuguese economy suffered its
imost severe recession since the 1970s, resulting in the country having to be
ibailed out by the European Commission, European Central Bank and
iInternational
iMonetary Fund (IMF). The bailout, agreed to in 2011, required Portugal to
ienter into a range of austerity measures in exchange for funding support of
i€78,000,000,000. In May 2014, the country exited the bailout but reaffirmed
iits commitment to maintaining its reformist momentum. At the time of exiting
ithe bailout, the economy had contracted by 0.7% in the first quarter of 2014;
ihowever, unemployment, while still high, had fallen to 15.3%.[212]
i
iThe average salary in Portugal is €1,019 per month, excluding self-employed
iindividuals[213] and the minimum wage, which is regulated by law, is €760 per
imonth (paid 14 times per annum) as of 2023.[214]
i
iThe Global Competitiveness Report for 2019, published by the World Economic
iForum, placed Portugal on the 34th position on the economic index.
i
iThe Economist Intelligence Unit's quality of life index placed Portugal as
ithe country with the 19th-best quality of life in the world for 2005, ahead
iof
iother economically and technologically advanced countries like France,
iGermany, the United Kingdom and South Korea, but nine places behind its sole
ineighbour, Spain.[215] This is despite the fact that Portugal remains as one
iof the countries with the lowest per capita GDP in Western Europe.[216]
i
iMajor state-owned companies include: Águas de Portugal (water), Caixa Geral
ide Depósitos (banking), Comboios de Portugal (railways), Companhia das
iLezírias (agriculture) and RTP (media). Some former state-owned entities are
imanaged by state-run holding company Parpública, which is a shareholder of
iseveral public and private companies.[citation needed] Among former
istate-owned companies recently privatized are: CTT (postal service) and ANA
i(airports).
i
iCompanies listed on Euronext Lisbon stock exchange like EDP, Galp, Jerónimo
iMartins, Mota-Engil, Novabase, Semapa, Portucel Soporcel, Portugal Telecom
iand
iSonae, are amongst the largest corporations of Portugal by number of
iemployees, net income or international market share. The Euronext Lisbon is
ithe major stock exchange of Portugal and is part of the pan-European group of
istock exchanges Euronext.[217] The PSI-20 is Portugal's most selective and
iwidely known stock index.
i
iThe International Monetary Fund issued an update report on the economy of
iPortugal in late-June 2017 with a strong near-term outlook and an increase in
iinvestments and exports over previous years. Because of a surplus in 2016,
ithe
icountry was no longer bound by the Excessive Deficit Procedure which had been
iimplemented during an earlier financial crisis. The banking system was more
istable, although there were still non-performing loans and corporate debt.
iThe
iIMF recommended working on solving these problems for Portugal to be able to
iattract more private investment. "Sustained strong growth, together with
icontinued public debt reduction, would reduce vulnerabilities arising from
ihigh indebtedness, particularly when monetary accommodation is reduced." The
iOECD economic reports since 2018 show recovery, albeit slow; and Portugal's
igrowth prospects continue positive for 2020.[218][219][220]
i
iIn recent years, rents and house prices have skyrocketed in Portugal,
iparticularly in Lisbon, where rents jumped 37% in 2022. Portugal's 8.3%
iinflation rate in the same year exacerbated the problem.[221] Within the EU,
iPortugal’s economy ranks lower than most Western states.[222]
i
iAgriculture in Portugal is based on small to medium-sized family-owned
idispersed units. However, the sector also includes larger scale intensive
ifarming export-oriented agrobusinesses backed by companies (like Grupo RAR's
iVitacress, Sovena, Lactogal, Vale da Rosa, Companhia das Lezírias and
iValouro). The country produces a wide variety of crops and livestock
iproducts,
iincluding: tomatoes, citrus, green vegetables, rice, wheat, barley, maize,
iolives, oilseeds, nuts, cherries, bilberry, table grapes, edible mushrooms,
idairy products, poultry and beef. According to FAO, Portugal is the top
iproducer of cork and carob in the world, accounting to about 50% and 30% of
iworld production, respectively.[223] It is also the third largest exporter of
ichestnuts and the third largest European producer of pulp.[224] Portugal is
iamong the top ten largest olive oil producers in the world and is the fourth
ilargest exporter.[225] The country is also one of the world's largest
iexporters of wine, being reputed for its fine wines.
i
iForestry has also played an important economic role among the rural
icommunities and industry (namely paper industry that includes Portucel
iSoporcel Group, engineered wood that includes Sonae Indústria, and furniture
ithat includes several manufacturing plants in and around Paços de Ferreira,
ithe core of Portugal's major industrial operations of IKEA). In 2001, the
igross agricultural product accounted for 4% of the national GDP.
i
iTraditionally a sea power, Portugal has had a strong tradition in the
iPortuguese fishing sector and is one of the countries with the highest fish
iconsumption per capita.[226] The main landing sites in Portugal (including
iAzores and Madeira), according to total landings in weight by year, are the
iharbours of Matosinhos, Peniche, Olhão, Sesimbra, Figueira da Foz, Sines,
iPortimão and Madeira. Portuguese-processed fish products are exported through
iseveral companies, under a number of different brands and registered
itrademarks, such as Ramirez, the world's oldest active canned fish producer.
i
iPortugal is a significant European minerals producer and is ranked among
iEurope's leading copper producers. The nation is also a notable producer of
itin, tungsten and uranium. However, the country lacks the potential to
iconduct
ihydrocarbon exploration and aluminium, a limitation that has hindered the
idevelopment of Portugal's mining and metallurgy sectors. Although the country
ihas vast iron and coal reserves – mainly in the north – after the 1974
irevolution and the consequent economic globalization, low competitiveness
iforced a decrease in the extraction activity for these minerals. The
iPanasqueira and Neves-Corvo mines are among the most recognized Portuguese
imines that are still in operation.[227]
i
iPortugal is rich in its lithium subsoil, which is especially concentrated in
ithe districts of Guarda, Viseu, Vila Real and Viana do Castelo, while most of
ithe country's lithium comes from the Gonçalo aplite-pegmatite field. The
ilargest lithium mine in Europe is operated by Grupo Mota, Felmica, in the
iGuarda region, which is estimated to have reserves for 30 years of
iproduction.
iIt has five more deposits in its possession.[228][229][230] Savannah
iResources
iin May 2018 announced a 52% increase in the estimated lithium resources at
ithe
iMina do Barroso Lithium Project in northern Portugal, saying the country
icould
ibecome the first European supplier of spodumene, a lithium-bearing
imineral.[231] The company said the estimated mineral resources at the mine
inow
istood at 14 million tonnes. Lithium prices have risen in expectation of
igrowing demand for the mineral, which is used in batteries for electric
ivehicles and for storing electricity from the power grid. Europe consumes
imore
ithan 20 per cent of the global supply of battery-grade lithium but currently
ihas to import all its supplies of the mineral.[232]
i
iW Resources stated in 2018 that it had started a new drilling campaign at its
iSão Martinho gold project in Portugal. The so-called reverse circulation
idrilling programme included 15 holes with around 2,000 metres (6,600 ft) of
itotal drilling. The objective is to extend resources by integrating the data
ifrom 2016 drilling results with the expansion expected with the ongoing
icampaign.[233][234][235]
i
iIndustry is diversified, ranging from automotive (Volkswagen Autoeuropa and
iPeugeot Citroën) and bicycles,[236] aerospace (Embraer and OGMA), electronics
iand textiles, to food, chemicals, cement and wood pulp. Volkswagen Group's
iAutoEuropa motor vehicle assembly plant in Palmela is among the largest
iforeign direct investment projects in Portugal. Modern non-traditional
itechnology-based industries, such as aerospace, biotechnology and information
itechnology, have been developed in several locations across the country.
iAlverca, Évora[237] and Ponte de Sor are the main centres of the Portuguese
iaerospace industry, which is led by Brazil-based company Embraer and the
iPortuguese company OGMA. Following the turn of the 21st century, many major
ibiotechnology and information technology industries have been founded, and
iare
iconcentrated in the metropolitan areas of Lisbon, Porto, Braga, Coimbra and
iAveiro.[citation needed]
i
iThe banking and insurance sectors performed well until the financial crisis
iof 2007–2008, and this partly reflected a rapid deepening of the market in
iPortugal. While sensitive to various types of market and underwriting risks,
iit has been estimated that overall both the life and non-life sectors will be
iable to withstand a number of severe shocks, even though the impact on
iindividual insurers varies widely.[238]
i
iTravel and tourism continue to be extremely important for Portugal. It has
ibeen necessary for the country to focus upon its niche attractions, such as
ihealth, nature and rural tourism, to stay ahead of its competitors.[239]
i
iPortugal is among the top 20 most-visited countries in the world, receiving
ian average of 20,000,000 foreign tourists each year.[240] In 2014, Portugal
iwas elected The Best European Country by USA Today.[241]
i
iIn 2017, Portugal was elected both Europe's Leading Destination[242] and in
i2018 and 2019, World's Leading Destination[243]
i
iTourist hotspots in Portugal are: Lisbon, Cascais, Fatima, Algarve, Madeira,
iPorto and Coimbra. Lisbon attracts the sixteenth-most tourists among European
icities[244] (with seven million tourists occupying the city's hotels in
i2006).[245] Notable luxury destinations include the Portuguese Riviera and
ithe
iComporta Coast.
i
iAlso, between 5–6 million religious pilgrims visit Fatima each year, where
iapparitions of the Virgin Mary to three shepherd children allegedly took
iplace
iin 1917. The Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fatima is one of the largest Roman
iCatholic shrines in the world. The Portuguese government continues to promote
iand develop new tourist destinations, such as the Douro Valley, the island of
iPorto Santo, and Alentejo.
i
iThe legend of the Rooster of Barcelos tells the story of a dead rooster's
imiraculous intervention in proving the innocence of a man who had been
ifalsely
iaccused and sentenced to death. The story is associated with the 17th-century
icalvary that is part of the collection of the Archaeological Museum located
iin
iPaço dos Condes, a gothic-style palace in Barcelos, a city in northwest
iPortugal. The Rooster of Barcelos is bought by thousands of tourists as a
inational souvenir.
i
iOn 30 November 2016, the United Nations added the Portuguese Bisalhães
itradition of making black pottery to the UNESCO Heritage Protection
iList.[246]
iOn 7 December 2017, the United Nations added the Bonecos de Estremoz – Toys
iof
iEstremoz tradition as an UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage of
iHumankind.[247]
i
iScientific and technological research activities in Portugal are mainly
iconducted within a network of R&D units belonging to public universities and
istate-managed autonomous research institutions like the INETI – Instituto
iNacional de Engenharia, Tecnologia e Inovação and the INRB – Instituto
iNacional dos Recursos Biológicos. The funding and management of this research
isystem is mainly conducted under the authority of the Ministry of Science,
iTechnology and Higher Education (MCTES) and the MCTES's Fundação para a
iCiência e Tecnologia (FCT).
i
iThe largest R&D units of the public universities by volume of research grants
iand peer-reviewed publications, include biosciences research institutions
ilike
ithe Instituto de Medicina Molecular, the Centre for Neuroscience and Cell
iBiology, the IPATIMUP, the Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular and the
iAbel Salazar Biomedical Sciences Institute.
i
iAmong the largest non-state-run research institutions in Portugal are the
iInstituto Gulbenkian de Ciência and the Champalimaud Foundation, a
ineuroscience and oncology research centre which awards every year one of the
ihighest monetary prizes of any science prize in the world. A number of both
inational and multinational high-tech and industrial companies, are also
iresponsible for research and development projects. One of the oldest learned
isocieties of Portugal is the Sciences Academy of Lisbon, founded in 1779.
i
iIberian bilateral state-supported research efforts include the International
iIberian Nanotechnology Laboratory and the Ibercivis distributed computing
iplatform, which are joint research programmes of both Portugal and Spain.
iPortugal is a member of several pan-European scientific organizations. These
iinclude the European Space Agency (ESA), the European Laboratory for Particle
iPhysics (CERN), ITER, and the European Southern Observatory (ESO).
i
iPortugal has the largest aquarium in Europe, the Lisbon Oceanarium, and the
iPortuguese have several other notable organizations focused on
iscience-related
iexhibits and divulgation, like the state agency Ciência Viva, a programme of
ithe Portuguese Ministry of Science and Technology to the promotion of a
iscientific and technological culture among the Portuguese population,[248]
ithe
iScience Museum of the University of Coimbra, the National Museum of Natural
iHistory at the University of Lisbon, and the Visionarium.
i
iWith the emergence and growth of several science parks throughout the world
ithat helped create many thousands of scientific, technological and
iknowledge-based businesses, Portugal started to develop several[249] science
iparks across the country. These include the Taguspark (in Oeiras), the
iCoimbra
iiParque (in Coimbra), the biocant (in Cantanhede), the Madeira Tecnopolo[250]
i(in Funchal), Sines Tecnopolo[251] (in Sines), Tecmaia[252] (in Maia) and
iParkurbis[253] (in Covilhã). Companies locate in the Portuguese science parks
ito take advantage of a variety of services ranging from financial and legal
iadvice through to marketing and technological support.
i
iEgas Moniz, a Portuguese physician who developed the cerebral angiography and
ileucotomy, received in 1949 the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine – he is
ithe first Portuguese recipient of a Nobel Prize and the only in the sciences.
i
iThe European Innovation Scoreboard 2011, placed Portugal-based innovation in
ithe 15th position, with an impressive increase in innovation expenditure and
ioutput.[254] Portugal was ranked 32nd in the Global Innovation Index in
i2022.[255]
i
iBy the early-1970s, Portugal's fast economic growth with increasing
iconsumption and purchase of new automobiles set the priority for improvements
iin transportation. Again in the 1990s, after joining the European Economic
iCommunity, the country built many new motorways. Today, the country has a
i68,732 km (42,708 mi) road network, of which almost 3,000 km (1,864 mi) are
ipart of system of 44 motorways. Opened in 1944, the first motorway (which
ilinked Lisbon to the National Stadium) was an innovative project that made
iPortugal one of the first countries in the world to establish a motorway
i(this
iroadway eventually became the Lisbon-Cascais highway, or A5).
i
iAlthough a few other tracts were created (around 1960 and 1970), it was only
iafter the beginning of the 1980s that large-scale motorway construction was
iimplemented. In 1972, Brisa, the highway concessionaire, was founded to
ihandle
ithe management of many of the region's motorways. On many highways, a toll
ineeds to be paid (see Via Verde). Vasco da Gama bridge is the longest bridge
iin the EU (the second longest in Europe) at 12.345 km.[256][257]
i
iContinental Portugal's 89,015 km2 (34,369 sq mi) territory is serviced by
ifour international airports located near the principal cities of Lisbon,
iPorto, Faro and Beja. Lisbon's geographical position makes it a stopover for
imany foreign airlines at several airports within the country. The primary
iflag-carrier is TAP Air Portugal, although many other domestic airlines
iprovide services within and without the country. The government decided to
ibuild a new airport outside Lisbon, in Alcochete, to replace Lisbon Portela
iAirport, though this plan has been suspended due to austerity measures.
iCurrently, the most important airports are in Lisbon, Porto, Faro, Funchal
i(Madeira), and Ponta Delgada (Azores), managed by the national airport
iauthority group ANA – Aeroportos de Portugal. One other important airport is
ithe Aeroporto Internacional das Lajes on the island of Terceira in the
iAzores.
iThis airport serves as one of two international airports serving countries
ioutside the European Union for all nine islands of the Azores. It also serves
ias a military air base for the United States Air Force. The base remains in
iuse to the present day.
i
iA national railway system that extends throughout the country and into Spain,
iis supported and administered by Comboios de Portugal (CP). Rail transport of
ipassengers and goods is derived using the 2,791 km (1,734 mi) of railway
ilines
icurrently in service, of which 1,430 km (889 mi) are electrified and about
i900
ikm (559 mi) allow train speeds greater than 120 km/h (75 mph). The railway
inetwork is managed by Infraestruturas de Portugal while the transport of
ipassengers and goods are the responsibility of CP, both public companies. In
i2006, the CP carried 133,000,000 passengers and 9,750,000 tonnes (9,600,000
ilong tons; 10,700,000 short tons) of goods.
i
iThe major seaports are located in Sines, Lisbon, Leixões, Setúbal, Aveiro,
iFigueira da Foz, and Faro.
i
iThe two largest metropolitan areas have subway systems: Lisbon Metro and
iMetro Sul do Tejo in the Lisbon metropolitan area and Porto Metro in the
iPorto
iMetropolitan Area, each with more than 35 km (22 mi) of lines. In Portugal,
iLisbon tram services have been supplied by the Companhia de Carris de Ferro
ide
iLisboa (Carris), for over a century. In Porto, a tram network, of which only
ia
itourist line on the shores of the Douro remains, began construction on 12
iSeptember 1895 (a first for the Iberian Peninsula). All major cities and
itowns
ihave their own local urban transport network, as well as taxi services.
i
iPortugal has considerable resources of wind and river power, the two most
icost-effective renewable energy sources. Since the turn of the 21st century,
ithere has been a trend towards the development of a renewable resource
iindustry and reduction of both consumption and use of fossil fuels. In 2006,
ithe world's largest solar power plant at that date, the Moura Photovoltaic
iPower Station, began operating near Moura, in the south, while the world's
ifirst commercial wave power farm, the Aguçadoura Wave Farm, opened in the
iNorte region (2008). By the end of 2006, 66% of the country's electrical
iproduction was from coal and fuel power plants, while 29% were derived from
ihydroelectric dams, and 6% by wind energy.[258]
i
iIn 2008, renewable energy resources were producing 43% of the nation's
iconsumption of electricity, even as hydroelectric production decreased with
isevere droughts.[259] As of June 2010, electricity exports had outnumbered
iimports. In the period between January and May 2010, 70% of the national
iproduction of energy came from renewable sources.[260]
i
iPortugal's national energy transmission company, Redes Energéticas Nacionais
i(REN), uses sophisticated modelling to predict weather, especially wind
ipatterns, and computer programs to calculate energy from the various
irenewable-energy plants. Before the solar/wind revolution, Portugal had
igenerated electricity from hydropower plants on its rivers for decades. New
iprogrammes combine wind and water: wind-driven turbines pump water uphill at
inight, the most blustery period; then the water flows downhill by day,
igenerating electricity, when consumer demand is highest. Portugal's
idistribution system is also now a two-way street. Instead of just delivering
ielectricity, it draws electricity from even the smallest generators, like
irooftop solar panels. The government aggressively encouraged such
icontributions by setting a premium price for those who buy rooftop-generated
isolar electricity.
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iThe Statistics Portugal (Portuguese: INE – Instituto Nacional de Estatística)
iestimates that, by 31 December 2022, the population was 10,467,366 (of which
i52.2% was female and 47.8% was male).[9][261] The median life expectancy in
i2022 was 82.47 years.[262] This population has been relatively homogeneous
ifor
imost of its history: a single religion (Roman Catholicism) and a single
ilanguage have contributed to this ethnic and national unity.[263]
i
iThe most important demographic influence in the modern Portuguese seems to be
ithe oldest one; current interpretation of Y-chromosome and mtDNA data
isuggests
ithat the Portuguese have their origin in Paleolithic peoples that began
iarriving to the European continent around 45,000 years ago. All subsequent
imigrations did leave an impact, genetically and culturally, but the main
ipopulation source of the Portuguese is still Paleolithic. Genetic studies
ishow
iPortuguese populations not to be significantly different from other European
ipopulations.[264] Portuguese people have a preponderancy of genetics (Iron
iAge
iPeriod)[265] which belong to R1b haplogroup family along with Brythonic,
iAlpine and Goidelic genetical markers. Also expectable but not so common are
iSouth European (Sardinian, Italian and Balkans), broadly North-western (West
iGermanic) and to a lesser extent British/Irish (Brythonic/Gaelic) and French
i(Alpine). With a low confidence range there are Scandinavian and East
iEuropean
igenetical markers.[265] Other sources would point out a small presence of
iBerber and Jewish that would be also part of a low confidence region.[266]
i
iNative Portuguese are an Iberian ethnic group and they form 95% of the whole
ipopulation,[citation needed] whose ancestry is very similar to Spaniards and
ihave strong ties with fellow Atlantic Arc countries like Ireland, British
iIsles, France and Belgium due to maritime trade dated as far back as the
iBronze Age. These maritime contacts and the prevalence of R1b haplogroup as
ithe main genetical marker of these countries suggest a common ancestry and
icultural proximity. Other maritime contacts with the Mediterranean especially
iwith Greeks, Phoenicians, Romans and Moors added some phenotypes in southern
iPortugal and particularly southern Spain (the Tartessos culture), making
iPortugal and north-western Spain a bridge between north-western Europe and
ithe
iMediterranean but maintaining the Atlantic character.
i
iDespite good economic development in the past three decades, the Portuguese
ihave been the shortest in Europe since 1890. This emerging height gap took
iplace in the 1840s and has increased since. One of the driving factors was
ithe
imodest real wage development, given the late industrialization and economic
igrowth in Portugal compared to the European core. Another determinant was the
idelayed human capital formation.[267]
i
iThe total fertility rate (TFR) as of 2015[update] was estimated at 1.52
ichildren born/woman, one of the lowest in the world, which is below the
ireplacement rate of 2.1,[268] it remains considerably below the high of 5.02
ichildren born per woman in 1911.[269] In 2016, 52.8% of births were to
iunmarried women.[270] Like most Western countries, Portugal has to deal with
ilow fertility levels: the country has experienced a sub-replacement fertility
irate since the 1980s.[271] Portugal subsequently has the 17th oldest
ipopulation in the world, with the average age of 43.7 years.[272] In part
ibecause of this low tfr its projected population in 2100 is 6.9 million.[273]
i
iThe structure of Portuguese society is characterized by a significant
iinequality which in 2016 placed the country in the lowest seventh of the
iSocial Justice Index for the European Union.[274]
i
iIn 2018, Portugal's parliament approved a budget plan for 2019 that includes
itax breaks for returning emigrants in a bid to lure back those who left
iduring
ithe financial crisis of 2007–2008. The expansionary 2019 budget, backed by a
ileft-wing majority in parliament, also aims to boost the purchasing power of
ihouseholds while cutting the already low deficit even further. Returning
iemigrants will be allowed to declare only half their taxable income for five
iyears if they return, provided they have lived abroad for at least three
iyears. The "Return Programme" is to run for two years. Around 500,000
iresidents left Portugal between 2010 and 2015 after the Great Recession.
iAlthough some 350,000 have since returned, this scheme aims to encourage more
ito return – a similar scheme exists in Ireland.[275] Portugal has approved a
icredit line for Portuguese emigrants aiming to invest in the country on their
ireturn. Furthermore, emigrants returning in 2019 and 2020 will see their
itaxes
ihalved as part of the stimulus to bring native Portuguese back and revitalize
ithe population and promote continued economic growth[276] – as Portugal
istruggles with a low birth rate and an ageing population. According to
iprojections by the national statistics office, Portugal's population will
ifall
ito 7.7 million by 2080 from 10.3 million now and the population will continue
ito age.[277]
i
iBased on commuting patterns, OECD and Eurostat define eight metropolitan
iareas of Portugal.[278] Only two have populations over 1 million, and since
ithe 2013 local government reform, these are the only two which also have
iadministrative legal status of metropolitan areas: Lisbon and
iPorto,[279][280]
iSeveral smaller metropolitan areas (Algarve, Aveiro, Coimbra, Minho and
iViseu),[280] also held this status from 2003 to 2008, when they were
iconverted
iinto intermunicipal communities, whose territories are (roughly) based on the
iNUTS III statistical regions.[281][280]
i
iIn 2007, Portugal had 10,617,575 inhabitants, of whom about 332,137 were
ilegal immigrants.[283] In 2015, Portugal had 10,341,330 inhabitants, of whom
iabout 383,759 were legal migrants, making up 3.7% of the population.[284] In
i2017, Portugal had 416,682 legal residents of foreign origin, of which
i203,753
iidentified as male, and 212,929 as female.[285] As of 2020, 32,147 residents
iof foreign origin acquired Portuguese nationality, of which 17,021 were
ifemale
iand 15,126 were male.[286]
i
iPortugal's colonial history has long since been a cornerstone of its national
iidentity, as has its geographic position at the south-western corner of
iEurope, looking out into the Atlantic Ocean. It was one of the last western
icolonial European powers to give up its overseas territories (among them
iAngola and Mozambique in 1975), turning over the administration of Macau to
ithe People's Republic of China at the end of 1999. Consequently, it has both
iinfluenced and been influenced by cultures from former colonies or
idependencies, resulting in immigration from these former territories for both
ieconomic and personal reasons. Portugal, long a country of emigration (the
ivast majority of Brazilians have Portuguese ancestry),[287] has now become a
icountry of net immigration,[288] and not just from the last Indian
i(Portuguese
iuntil 1961), African (Portuguese until 1975), and Far East Asian (Portuguese
iuntil 1999) overseas territories. An estimated 800,000 Portuguese returned to
iPortugal as the country's African possessions gained independence in
i1975.[287]
i
iSince the 1990s, along with a boom in construction, several new waves of
iUkrainian, Brazilian, Lusophone Africans and other Africans have settled in
ithe country. Romanians, Moldovans, Kosovo Albanians, Russians and Chinese
ihave
ialso migrated to the country. Portugal's Romani population is estimated to be
iat about 40,000.
i
iNumbers of Venezuelan, Pakistani and Indian migrants are also significant. It
iis estimated that over 30,000 seasonal, often illegal immigrants work in
iagriculture, mainly in the south where they are often exploited by organized
iseasonal workers' networks. The workers sometimes get paid less than half the
ilegal minimum wage. These migrants, who often arrive without due
idocumentation
ior work contracts, make up over 90% of agricultural workers in the south of
iPortugal. Most are Indo-Asians, from India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan and
iThailand. In the interior of the Alentejo there are many African workers.
iSignificant numbers also come from Eastern Europe, Moldova, Ukraine, Romania
iand Brazil.[289]
i
iIn addition, a number of EU citizens, mostly from the United Kingdom or other
inorthern European countries, have become permanent residents in the country
i(with the British community being mostly composed of retired pensioners who
ilive in the Algarve and Madeira).[290]
i
iReligion in Portugal (Census 2021)[4]
i
iRoman Catholicism, which has a long history in Portugal, remains the dominant
ireligion. Portugal has no official religion, though in the past, the Catholic
iChurch in Portugal was the state religion.[291][292] According to the 2021
iCensus, 80.2% of the Portuguese population was Roman Catholic Christian.[4]
iThe country has small Protestant, Latter-day Saint, Muslim, Hindu, Sikh,
iEastern Orthodox Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Baháʼí, Buddhist, Jewish and
iSpiritist communities. Influences from African Traditional Religion and
iChinese Traditional Religion are also felt among many people, particularly in
ifields related with Traditional Chinese Medicine and Traditional African
iHerbal Medicine. Some 14.1% of the population declared themselves to be
inon-religious.[4]
i
iMany Portuguese holidays, festivals and traditions have a Christian origin or
iconnotation. Although relations between the Portuguese state and the Roman
iCatholic Church were generally amiable and stable since the earliest years of
ithe Portuguese nation, their relative power fluctuated. In the 13th and 14th
icenturies, the church enjoyed power and close identification with early
iPortuguese nationalism and the foundation of the Portuguese educational
isystem, including its first university.
i
iThe growth of the Portuguese overseas empire made its missionaries important
iagents of colonization, with important roles in the education and
ievangelization of people from all the inhabited continents. The growth of
iliberal and nascent republican movements during the eras leading to the
iformation of the First Portuguese Republic (1910–26) changed the role and
iimportance of organized religion.
i
iPortugal is a secular state: church and state were formally separated during
ithe First Portuguese Republic, and this was reiterated in the 1976 Portuguese
iConstitution. Other than the Constitution, the two most important documents
irelating to religious freedom in Portugal are the 1940 Concordata (later
iamended in 1971) between Portugal and the Holy See and the 2001 Religious
iFreedom Act.
i
iPortuguese is the official language of Portugal. It is a Romance language
ithat is derived from Galician-Portuguese, which was spoken in what is now
iGalicia and Northern Portugal. There are still strong similarities between
ithe
iGalician and Portuguese cultures. Galicia is a consultative observer of the
iCommunity of Portuguese Language Countries.
i
iThe Portuguese language is derived from the Latin spoken by the romanized
ipre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula around 2000 years ago –
iparticularly the Celts,[26] Conii,[293] Lusitanians[25] and Turduli.[294] In
ithe 15th and 16th centuries, the language spread worldwide as Portugal
iestablished a colonial and commercial empire between 1415 and 1999.[295]
iPortuguese is spoken as a native language in five different continents, with
iBrazil accounting for the largest number of native Portuguese speakers of any
icountry. In 2013 the Portuguese language is the official language spoken in
iBrazil, Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, São Tomé and Príncipe, Guinea-Bissau,
iEquatorial Guinea, and East Timor. These countries, plus Macau Special
iAdministrative Region (People's Republic of China) where Portuguese is
ico-official with Cantonese, make up the Lusosphere, a term derived from the
iancient Roman province of "Lusitania", which currently matches the Portuguese
iterritory south of the Douro river.[296]
i
iMirandese is also recognized as a co-official regional language in some
imunicipalities of North-Eastern Portugal. It is part of the Astur-Leonese
igroup of languages.[297] An estimate of between 6,000 and 7,000 Mirandese
ispeakers has been documented for Portugal.[298] Furthermore, a particular
idialect known as Barranquenho, spoken in Barrancos, is also officially
irecognized and protected in Portugal since 2021.[299] Minderico, a sociolect
iof the Portuguese language, is spoken by around 500 people in the town of
iMinde.[300]
i
iAccording to the International English Proficiency Index, Portugal has a high
iproficiency level in English, higher than those of other Romance-speaking
iEuropean countries like Spain, Italy or France.[301]
i
iThe educational system is divided into preschool (for those under age six),
ibasic education (nine years, in three stages, compulsory), secondary
ieducation
i(three years, compulsory since 2010), and higher education (subdivided in
iuniversity and polytechnic education). Universities are usually organized
iinto
ifaculties. Institutes and schools are also common designations for autonomous
isubdivisions of Portuguese higher education institutions.
i
iThe total adult literacy rate in Portugal was 99.8% in 2021[302] and 100% of
iprimary school enrolments. According to the Programme for International
iStudent Assessment (PISA) 2018, Portugal scored around the OECD average in
ireading, mathematics and science. In reading and mathematics, mean
iperformance
iin 2018 was close to the level observed in 2009 to 2015; in science, mean
iperformance in 2018 was below that of 2015, and returned close to the level
iobserved in 2009 and 2012.[303][304]
i
iAbout 46,9% of college-age citizens (20 years old) attend one of Portugal's
ihigher education institutions[305][306][307] (compared with 50% in the United
iStates and 35% in the OECD countries). In addition to being a destination for
iinternational students, Portugal is also among the top places of origin for
iinternational students. All higher education students, both domestic and
iinternational, totalled 380,937 in 2005.
i
iPortuguese universities have existed since 1290. The oldest Portuguese
iuniversity[308] was first established in Lisbon before moving to Coimbra.
iHistorically, within the scope of the Portuguese Empire, the Portuguese
ifounded the oldest engineering school of the Americas (the Real Academia de
iArtilharia, Fortificação e Desenho of Rio de Janeiro) in 1792, as well as the
ioldest medical college in Asia (the Escola Médico-Cirúrgica of Goa) in 1842.
iPresently, the largest university in Portugal is the University of Lisbon.
i
iThe Bologna process has been adopted by Portuguese universities and
ipoly-technical institutes in 2006. Higher education in state-run educational
iestablishments is provided on a competitive basis, a system of numerus
iclausus
iis enforced through a national database on student admissions. However, every
ihigher education institution offers also a number of additional vacant places
ithrough other extraordinary admission processes for sportsmen, mature
iapplicants (over 23 years old), international students, foreign students from
ithe Lusosphere, degree owners from other institutions, students from other
iinstitutions (academic transfer), former students (readmission), and course
ichange, which are subject to specific standards and regulations set by each
iinstitution or course department.
i
iMost student costs are supported with public money. However, with the
iincreasing tuition fees a student has to pay to attend a Portuguese state-run
ihigher education institution and the attraction of new types of students
i(many
ias international students and part-time students or in evening classes) like
iemployees, businessmen, parents, pensioners and foreigners (most prominently
ifrom Brazil,[309] a Portuguese-speaking country), many departments make a
isubstantial profit from every additional student enrolled in courses, with
ibenefits for the college or university's gross tuition revenue and
iwithout[citation needed] loss of educational quality (teacher per student,
icomputer per student, classroom size per student, etc.).
i
iPortugal has entered into cooperation agreements with the Massachusetts
iInstitute of Technology and other US institutions to further develop and
iincrease the effectiveness of Portuguese higher education and research.
i
iAccording to the Human Development Report, the average life expectancy in
iPortugal had reached 82 years in 2017;[310] in 2020 it was estimated at 82.11
iyears.[311] As projected by the United Nations, the life expectancy of the
iPortuguese population will be over 90 years when we reach 2100.[312]
i
iPortugal ranks 12th in the best public health systems in the world, ahead of
iother countries like the United Kingdom, Germany or Sweden.[313][314]
i
iThe Portuguese health system is characterized by three coexisting systems:
ithe National Health Service (Serviço Nacional de Saúde, SNS), special social
ihealth insurance schemes for certain professions (health subsystems) and
ivoluntary private health insurance. The SNS provides universal coverage. In
iaddition, about 25% of the population is covered by the health subsystems,
i10%
iby private insurance schemes and another 7% by mutual funds.
i
iThe Ministry of Health is responsible for developing health policy as well as
imanaging the SNS. Five regional health administrations are in charge of
iimplementing the national health policy objectives, developing guidelines and
iprotocols and supervising health care delivery. Decentralization efforts have
iaimed at shifting financial and management responsibility to the regional
ilevel. In practice, however, the autonomy of regional health administrations
iover budget setting and spending has been limited to primary care.
i
iThe SNS is predominantly funded through general taxation. Employer (including
ithe state) and employee contributions represent the main funding sources of
ithe health subsystems. In addition, direct payments by the patient and
ivoluntary health insurance premiums account for a large proportion of
ifunding.
i
iSimilar to the other Eur-A countries, most Portuguese die from
inoncommunicable diseases. Mortality from cardiovascular diseases (CVD) is
ihigher than in the eurozone, but its two main components, ischaemic heart
idisease and cerebrovascular disease, display inverse trends compared with the
iEur-A, with cerebrovascular disease being the single biggest killer in
iPortugal (17%). Portuguese people die 12% less often from cancer than in the
iEur-A, but mortality is not declining as rapidly as in the Eur-A. Cancer is
imore frequent among children as well as among women younger than 44 years.
iAlthough lung cancer (slowly increasing among women) and breast cancer
i(decreasing rapidly) are scarcer, cervical cancer and prostate cancer are
imore
ifrequent. Portugal has the highest mortality rate for diabetes in the Eur-A,
iwith a sharp increase since the 1980s.
i
iPortugal's infant mortality rate is around 2 deaths per 1000 newborns, with
i2.4 deaths per 1000 live births.
i
iPeople are usually well informed about their health status, the positive and
inegative effects of their behaviour on their health, and their use of health
icare services. Yet their perceptions of their health, can differ from what
iadministrative and examination-based data show about levels of illness within
ipopulations. Thus, survey results based on self-reporting at household level,
icomplement other data on health status and the use of services.
i
iOnly one third of adults rated their health as good or very good in Portugal
i(Kasmel et al., 2004). This is the lowest of the Eur-A countries reporting
iand
ireflects the relatively adverse situation of the country in terms of
imortality
iand selected morbidity.[315] Hospital de Santa Maria is the largest
iuniversity
ihospital in Portugal.[316]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iPortugal has developed a specific culture while being influenced by various
icivilizations that have crossed the Mediterranean and the European continent,
ior were introduced when it played an active role during the Age of Discovery.
iIn the 1990s and 2000s (decade), Portugal modernized its public cultural
ifacilities, in addition to the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation established in
i1956 in Lisbon.
i
iThese include the Belém Cultural Centre in Lisbon, Serralves Foundation and
ithe Casa da Música, both in Porto, as well as new public cultural facilities
ilike municipal libraries and concert halls that were built or renovated in
imany municipalities across the country. Portugal is home to 17 UNESCO World
iHeritage Sites, ranking it 9th in Europe and 18th in the world.
i
iTraditional architecture is distinctive and include the Manueline, also known
ias Portuguese late Gothic a sumptuous, composite Portuguese style of
iarchitectural ornamentation of the first decades of the 16th century,
ifollowed
iby Pombaline style of the 18th century. A 20th-century interpretation of
itraditional architecture, Soft Portuguese style, appears extensively in major
icities, especially Lisbon. Modern Portugal has given the world renowned
iarchitects like Eduardo Souto de Moura, Álvaro Siza Vieira (both Pritzker
iPrize winners) and Gonçalo Byrne. In Portugal Tomás Taveira is also
inoteworthy, particularly for stadium design.[317][318][319] The azulejo is a
imainstream, typical element among Portugual's traditional building materials
iand construction techniques.[320][321]
i
iPortuguese cinema has a long tradition, reaching back to the birth of the
imedium in the late 19th century. António Lopes Ribeiro, António Reis, Pedro
iCosta, Manoel de Oliveira, João César Monteiro, José Fonseca e Costa, Edgar
iPêra, António-Pedro Vasconcelos, Fernando Lopes, João Botelho, João Mário
iGrilo and Leonel Vieira, are among those that gained notability. Noted
iPortuguese film actors include Joaquim de Almeida, Nuno Lopes, Daniela Ruah,
iMaria de Medeiros, Diogo Infante, Soraia Chaves, Ribeirinho, Lúcia Moniz, and
iDiogo Morgado.
i
iPortuguese cuisine is very diverse. Different regions have their own
itraditional dishes. The Portuguese have a culture of good food, and
ithroughout
ithe country there are myriad good restaurants and typical small tasquinhas.
iThe Portuguese consume a lot of dry cod (bacalhau in Portuguese), for which
ithere are hundreds of recipes ranging from bacalhau à Brás to bacalhau à
iGomes
ide Sá among many other popular examples such as bacalhau com natas. Two other
ipopular fish recipes are grilled sardines and caldeirada, a tomato-based stew
ithat can be made from several types of fish or molluscs with a mix of onion,
igarlic, bay leaf, potatoes, tomatoes, peppers, parsley or coriander.
i
iTypical Portuguese meat recipes made out of the customary beef, pork,
ichicken, goat, lamb or duck meat, include cozido à portuguesa, feijoada,
ifrango de churrasco, leitão (roast suckling pig), chanfana and carne de porco
ià alentejana. A very popular northern dish is dobrada, a tripe with white
ibeans and carrots stew, often served with steamed white rice, and the related
itripas à moda do Porto which is a traditional dish from Porto. Peri-peri
ichicken is a spicy charcoal chicken dish served with fries or rice and
ivegetables, a favourite throughout Portugal, but most common in the Algarve
iregion.
i
iTypical fast food dishes include the Francesinha (Frenchie) from Porto and
ibifanas (grilled pork) or prego (grilled beef) sandwiches, which are well
iknown around the country.
i
iThe Portuguese art of pastry has its origins in the many medieval Catholic
imonasteries spread widely across the country. These monasteries, using very
ifew ingredients (mostly eggs, vanilla, cinnamon, flour, almonds and some
iliqueurs), managed to create a spectacular wide range of different pastries,
iof which pastéis de Belém (or pastéis de nata) originally from Lisbon,
ipastéis
ide Tentúgal from the Baixo Mondego valley, ovos moles from Aveiro and
itigeladas from Abrantes, are examples.
i
iPortuguese wines have enjoyed international recognition since the times of
ithe Romans, who associated Portugal with their god Bacchus. Today, the
icountry
iis known by wine lovers and its wines have won several international prizes.
iSome of the best Portuguese wines are Vinho Verde, Vinho Alvarinho, Vinho do
iDouro, Vinho do Alentejo, Vinho do Dão, Vinho da Bairrada and the sweet Port
iWine, Madeira Wine, and the Moscatel from Setúbal and Favaios. Port and
iMadeira are particularly appreciated in a wide range of places around the
iworld.
i
iIndustrialized, export-oriented fashion and design in clothing, footwear,
ikitchenware and furniture industries, was pioneered by fashion designers like
iEduarda Abbondanza, Mário Matos Ribeiro, Ana Salazar, José António Tenente,
iJoão Tomé, Francisco Pontes or Manuela Gonçalves, as well as textile industry
iindustrialists established in places like Vale do Ave, in clothing;[322]
iseveral entrepreneurs of the Portuguese footwear industry;[323][324] Vista
iAlegre Atlantis and Rafael Bordalo Pinheiro, in tableware and
ikitchenwear;[325] and businesspersons of the old-established furniture
iindustry heavily concentrated in and around places such as Paços de Ferreira
iand Paredes.[326][327] Corkware and other cork-based products such as
ifurniture, decorative items and floor and wall coatings, are also distinctive
iproducts found among typical designer creations of Portuguese
iorigin.[328][329][330][331][332]
i
iFiligree began to be produced in Portugal in the 8th century with the arrival
iof Arab migrants after the Umayyad invasion of Iberian Peninsula, who brought
inew patterns with them. With time, the peninsula began to produce different
ifiligree patterns, but while in Spain the filigree jewellery-making tradition
ibecame less relevant, in Portugal it was perfected. After the 18th century,
iPortuguese Filigree already had its own distinctive imagery, motifs and
ishapes. Filigree from the 17th and 18th centuries became famous for their
iextraordinary complexity. Gold and silver filigree jewellery of delicate and
iartistic design is still made in considerable quantities throughout the
icountry, particularly filigree hearts, which are iconic symbols of Portuguese
ijewellery-making.[333][334]
i
iPortuguese literature, one of the earliest Western literatures, developed
ithrough text as well as song. Until 1350, the Portuguese-Galician troubadours
ispread their literary influence to most of the Iberian Peninsula,[335] like
iKing D. Dinis (1261–1325) who became famous for his poetry. Other kings would
iwrite and sponsor works of literature across Portuguese history, like D.
iFernando (1367–1383) who supported Pêro Menino in writing o Livro da
iFalcoaria[82]. Another notable name in Portuguese literature is Gil Vicente
i(c. 1465–c. 1536), one of the founders of Portuguese dramatic traditions.
i
iAdventurer and poet Luís de Camões (c. 1524–1580) wrote the epic poem Os
iLusíadas (The Lusiads), with Virgil's Aeneid as his main influence.[336]
iModern Portuguese poetry is rooted in neoclassic and contemporary styles, as
iexemplified by Bocage (1765–1805), Antero de Quental (1842–1891) and Fernando
iPessoa (1888–1935). Modern Portuguese literature is represented by authors
isuch as Almeida Garrett, Camilo Castelo Branco, Eça de Queirós, Fernando
iPessoa, Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen, António Lobo Antunes, Miguel Torga
iand Agustina Bessa-Luís. Particularly popular and distinguished is José
iSaramago, recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Literature.
i
iPortuguese music encompasses a wide variety of genres. The traditional one is
ithe Portuguese folk music which has deep roots in local customs, utilising
iinstruments such as bagpipes (gaita), drums, flutes, tambourines, accordions
iand ukuleles (cavaquinho). Within Portuguese folk music is the renowned genre
iof Fado, a melancholic urban music originated in Lisbon in the 19th century,
iprobably inside bohemian environments, usually associated with the Portuguese
iguitar and saudade, or longing. Coimbra fado, a unique type of "troubadour
iserenading" fado, is also noteworthy. Internationally notable performers
iinclude Amália Rodrigues, Carlos Paredes, José Afonso, Mariza, Carlos do
iCarmo, António Chainho, Mísia, Dulce Pontes and Madredeus.
i
iIn the classical music domain, Portugal is represented by names as the
ipianists Artur Pizarro, Maria João Pires, Sequeira Costa, the violinists
iCarlos Damas, Gerardo Ribeiro and in the past by the great cellist
iGuilhermina
iSuggia. Notable composers include Marcos Portugal, José Vianna da Motta,
iCarlos Seixas, João Domingos Bomtempo, João de Sousa Carvalho, Luís de
iFreitas
iBranco and his student Joly Braga Santos, Fernando Lopes-Graça, Emmanuel
iNunes
iand Sérgio Azevedo. Similarly, contemporary composers such as Nuno Malo and
iMiguel d'Oliveira have achieved some international success writing.
i
iIn addition to Folk, Fado and Classical music, other genres are present at
iPortugal like pop and other types of modern music, particularly from North
iAmerica and the United Kingdom, as well as a wide range of Portuguese,
iCaribbean, Lusophone African and Brazilian artists and bands. Artists with
iinternational recognition include Dulce Pontes, Moonspell, Buraka Som
iSistema,
iBlasted Mechanism, David Carreira and The Gift, with the three latter being
inominees for a MTV Europe Music Award.
i
iPortugal has several summer music festivals, such as Festival Sudoeste in
iZambujeira do Mar, Festival de Paredes de Coura in Paredes de Coura, Festival
iVilar de Mouros near Caminha, Boom Festival in Idanha-a-Nova Municipality,
iNOS
iAlive, Sumol Summer Fest in Ericeira, Rock in Rio Lisboa and Super Bock Super
iRock in Greater Lisbon. Out of the summer season, Portugal has a large number
iof festivals, designed more to an urban audience, like Flowfest or Hip Hop
iPorto. One of the largest international Goa trance festivals takes place in
icentral Portugal every two years, the Boom Festival, that is also the only
ifestival in Portugal to win international awards: European Festival Award
i2010
i– Green'n'Clean Festival of the Year and the Greener Festival Award
iOutstanding 2008 and 2010.
i
iThe student festivals of Queima das Fitas, which are major events in a number
iof cities across Portugal, show every year a selection of well-established,
ihigh-profile musicians and bands to the public as well as newer, on the rise,
iupcoming success artists seeking definite recognition.[337]
i
iIn 2005, Portugal held the MTV Europe Music Awards, in Pavilhão Atlântico,
iLisbon. Furthermore, Portugal won the Eurovision Song Contest 2017 in Kyiv
iwith the song "Amar pelos dois" presented by Salvador Sobral, and
isubsequently
ihosted the 2018 contest at the Altice Arena in Lisbon.[338][339]
i
iFootball is the most popular sport in Portugal. There are several football
icompetitions ranging from local amateur to world-class professional level.
iThe
ilegendary Eusébio is still a major symbol of Portuguese football history.
iFIFA
iWorld Player of the Year winners Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo, who won the
iFIFA Ballon d'Or, are two world-class Portuguese football players. Portuguese
ifootball managers are also noteworthy, with José Mourinho[341] and Abel
iFerreira[342] being among the most renowned.
i
iThe Portugal national football team – Seleção Nacional – have won one UEFA
iEuropean Championship title: the UEFA Euro 2016, with a 1–0 victory in the
ifinal over France, the tournament hosts. In addition, Portugal finished first
iin the 2018–19 UEFA Nations League with a 1–0 win over the Netherlands in the
ifinal (held in Portugal), second in the Euro 2004 (also held in Portugal),
ithird in the 1966 FIFA World Cup and 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, and fourth
iin the 2006 FIFA World Cup. At youth level, Portugal have won two FIFA World
iYouth Championships (in 1989 and 1991) and several UEFA European Youth
iChampionships.
i
iS.L. Benfica, Sporting CP and FC Porto are the largest sports clubs by
ipopularity and by number of trophies won, often known as "os três grandes"
i("the big three"). They have won eight titles in the European UEFA club
icompetitions, were present in 21 finals and have been regular contenders in
ithe last stages almost every season. Other than football, many Portuguese
isports clubs, including the "big three", compete in several other sports
ievents with a varying level of success and popularity, these may include
iroller hockey, basketball, futsal, handball, volleyball and athletics. The
iPortuguese Football Federation (FPF) – Federação Portuguesa de Futebol –
iannually hosts the Algarve Cup, a prestigious women's football tournament
ithat
ihas been celebrated in the Portuguese region of Algarve.
i
iThe Portuguese national rugby union team qualified for the 2007 Rugby World
iCup and the Portuguese national rugby sevens team has played in the World
iRugby Sevens Series.
i
iIn athletics, the Portuguese have won a number of gold, silver and bronze
imedals in the European, World and Olympic Games competitions. Road cycling,
iwith Volta a Portugal being the most important race, is also a popular sports
ievent and includes professional cycling teams such as Sporting CP, Boavista,
iClube de Ciclismo de Tavira and União Ciclista da Maia. At international
ilevel, Portuguese cyclists have already achieved good results. Joaquim
iAgostinho finished on the podium in 1978 and 1979 Tour de France, and 1974
iVuelta a España. Rui Costa has won the world title in the men's road race.
i
iThe country has also achieved notable performances in sports including
ifencing, judo, kitesurf, rowing, sailing, surfing, shooting, taekwondo,
itriathlon and windsurfing, winning several European and world titles.
iPortugal's paralympic athletes have also won many medals in sports including
iswimming, boccia, athletics, mixed martial arts and wrestling.
i
iIn motorsport, Portugal is internationally noted for the Rally of Portugal,
iand the Estoril and Algarve Circuits as well as the revived Porto Street
iCircuit which holds a stage of the WTCC every two years, as well as for a
inumber of internationally noted pilots and racers such as Miguel Oliveira,
iTiago Monteiro, António Félix da Costa, Filipe Albuquerque, Pedro Lamy,
iArmindo Araújo and others in a wide range of varied motorsports.
i
iIn equestrian sports, Portugal won the only Horseball-Pato World Championship
iin 2006 achieved the third position in the First Horseball World Cup and has
iachieved several victories in the European Working Equitation Championship.
i
iIn water sports, Portugal has three major sports: swimming, water polo and
isurfing. Most recently, Portugal had success in canoeing with several world
iand European champions, such as olympic medalists. Annually, the country also
ihosts one of the stages of the World Surf League men's and women's
iChampionship Tour, the MEO Rip Curl Pro Portugal at the Supertubos in
iPeniche.
i
iNorthern Portugal has its own original martial art, Jogo do Pau, in which the
ifighters use staffs to confront one or several opponents. Other popular
isport-related recreational outdoor activities with thousands of enthusiasts
inationwide include airsoft, fishing, golf, hiking, hunting and orienteering.
i
iPortugal is one of the world's best golf destinations.[343] It has received
iseveral awards by the World Golf Awards.[344]
i
iHigh-profile, successful competitive athleticism and sportsmanship in
iPortugal can be traced back to the time of Ancient Rome. Gaius Appuleius
iDiocles (104 – after 146 AD) was a noteworthy charioteer born in Lamego who
ibecame one of the most celebrated athletes in ancient history. He is often
icited as the highest-paid athlete of all time.[345][346]
i
iPortugal has a rich history in painting. The first well-known painters dating
iback to the 15th century – like Nuno Gonçalves and Vasco Fernandes – were
ipart
iof the late Gothic painting period. During the Renaissance, Portuguese
ipainting was highly influenced by Northern European painting. In the Baroque
iperiod Josefa de Óbidos and Vieira Lusitano were the most prolific painters.
iJosé Malhoa, known for his work Fado, and Columbano Bordalo Pinheiro (who
ipainted the portraits of Teófilo Braga and Antero de Quental) were both
ireferences in naturalist painting.
i
iThe 20th century saw the arrival of Modernism, and along with it came the
imost prominent Portuguese painters: Amadeo de Souza-Cardoso, who was heavily
iinfluenced by French painters, particularly the Delaunays (Robert and Sonia).
iAmong his best-known works is Canção Popular a Russa e o Fígaro. Other great
imodernist painters/writers include Carlos Botelho and Almada Negreiros,
ifriend
ito the poet Fernando Pessoa, who painted Pessoa's portrait. He was deeply
iinfluenced by both Cubist and Futurist trends.
i
iProminent international figures in visual arts nowadays include painters
iVieira da Silva, Júlio Pomar, Helena Almeida, Joana Vasconcelos, Julião
iSarmento and Paula Rego.
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== Notes =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portugal
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Portugal - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Portugal	texopher.com	70
