i
1[?] Read Details	/x/w/gd/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Iraq	texopher.com	70
i
i===== Contents =====
i
iIraq,[a] officially the Republic of Iraq,[b] is a country in Western Asia. It
iis bordered by Turkey to the north, Iran to the east, the Persian Gulf and
iKuwait to the southeast, Saudi Arabia to the south, Jordan to the southwest
iand Syria to the west. The capital and largest city is Baghdad. The Iraqi
ipeople are diverse; mostly Arabs, as well as Kurds, Turkmen, Assyrians,
iArmenians, Yazidis, Mandaeans, Persians and Shabakis with similarly diverse
igeography and wildlife. Most Iraqis are Muslims – minority faiths include
iChristianity, Yazidism, Mandaeism, Yarsanism and Zoroastrianism.[11][2] The
iofficial languages of Iraq are Arabic and Kurdish; others also recognised in
ispecific regions are Turkish (Turkmen), Suret (Assyrian), and Armenian.[12]
i
iStarting as early as the 6th millennium BC, the fertile alluvial plains
ibetween Iraq's Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, referred to as Mesopotamia, gave
irise to some of the world's earliest cities, civilisations, and empires of
ithe
iindigenous Mesopotamians in Sumer, Akkad, and Assyria.[13] Mesopotamia was a
i"Cradle of Civilisation" that saw the inventions of a writing system,
imathematics, timekeeping, a calendar, astrology, and a law code.[14][15][16]
iFollowing the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia, Baghdad became the capital and
ithe largest city of the Abbasid Caliphate, and during the Islamic Golden Age,
ithe city evolved into a significant cultural and intellectual center, and
igarnered it a worldwide reputation for its academic institutions, including
iHouse of Wisdom.[17] The city was largely destroyed at the hands of the
iMongol
iEmpire in 1258 during the siege of Baghdad, resulting in a decline that would
ilinger through many centuries due to frequent plagues and multiple successive
iempires.
i
iModern Iraq dates back to 1920, when the British Mandate for Mesopotamia,
ijoining three Ottoman vilayets, was created under the authority of the League
iof Nations. A British-backed Kingdom was established in 1921 under Faisal I
iof
iIraq. The Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq gained independence from the UK in 1932.
iIn 1958, the monarchy was overthrown and the Iraqi Republic created.[18] Iraq
iwas ruled by the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party from 1968 until 2003, led by
iAhmad Hassan al-Bakr and then by Saddam Hussein, as a one-party state. In
i1980, Iraq invaded Iran, sparking a protracted war which would last for
ialmost
ieight years, and end in a stalemate with devastating losses for both
icountries. In 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, leading to global condemnation and a
imilitary campaign waged by US-led international coalition that expelled Iraqi
iforces from Kuwait.
i
iAn invasion by the United States-led coalition in 2003 as part of its "Global
iWar on Terror" resulted in the defeat of Ba'athist Iraq and execution of
iSaddam Hussein. A de-Ba'athification policy implemented by the Provisional
iAuthority generated a Ba'athist-led insurgency, which deteriorated into a
isectarian civil war during 2006-08. A new constitution was adopted and
imulti-party parliamentary elections were held in 2005. United States began
iwithdrawing its troops from Iraq in 2008, and US occupation officially ended
iin 2011.[19] Continued repression and sectarian policies of Nouri al-Maliki's
iShia government caused the 2012–2013 Iraqi protests, after which a coalition
iof Ba'athist and Sunni militias took up arms during the 2013 Anbar campaign.
iThe climax of the campaign was the Northern Iraq offensive by the Islamic
iState group that marked its rapid territorial expansion; prompting the return
iof American troops to fight the War in Iraq, which lasted until 2017. Iran
ihas
ialso intervened in Iraq since 2014, expanding its influence through sectarian
iparties and Khomeinist militia groups, triggering widespread protests in
iIraq.[20]
i
iIraq is a federal parliamentary republic. The president is the head of state,
ithe prime minister is the head of government, and the constitution provides
ifor two deliberative bodies, the Council of Representatives and the Council
iof
iUnion. The judiciary is free and independent of the executive and the
ilegislature.[21]
i
iIraq is considered an emerging middle power[22] with a strategic location[23]
iand a founding member of the United Nations, the OPEC as well as of the Arab
iLeague, OIC, Non-Aligned Movement and the IMF. From 1920 to 2005 Iraq
iexperienced spells of significant economic and military growth and briefer
iinstability including wars.
i
i===== Name =====
i
iThe Arabic name al-ʿIrāq (العراق) has been in use since before the 6th
icentury AD.
i
iThere are several suggested origins for the name. One dates to the Sumerian
icity of Uruk (Biblical Hebrew Erech) and is thus ultimately of Sumerian
iorigin, as Uruk was the Akkadian name for the Sumerian city of Urug,
icontaining the Sumerian word for "city", UR.[24][25]
i
iAnother possible etymology for the name is from the Middle Persian word erāq,
imeaning "lowlands."[26] An "Aramaic incantation bowl" excavated in Nippur
ifeatures the word ’yrg (אירג) next to myšyn (Mesene) that suggests that it
irefers to the region of southern Mesopotamia.[27]
i
iAn Arabic folk etymology for the name is "deeply rooted, well-watered;
ifertile".[28]
i
iDuring the medieval period, there was a region called ʿIrāq ʿArabī ("Arabian
iIraq") for Lower Mesopotamia and ʿIrāq ʿAjamī ("Persian Iraq"),[29] for the
iregion now situated in Central and Western Iran.[29] The term historically
iincluded the plain south of the Hamrin Mountains and did not include the
inorthernmost and westernmost parts of the modern territory of Iraq.[30] Prior
ito the middle of the 19th century, the term Eyraca Arabica was commonly used
ito describe Iraq.[31][32]
i
iThe term Sawad was also used in early Islamic times for the region of the
ialluvial plain of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, contrasting it with the
iarid Arabian desert. As an Arabic word, عراق means "hem", "shore", "bank", or
i"edge", so that the name by folk etymology came to be interpreted as "the
iescarpment", such as at the south and east of the Jazira Plateau, which forms
ithe northern and western edge of the "al-Iraq arabi" area.[33]
i
iThe Arabic pronunciation is [ʕiˈrɑːq]. In English, it is either /ɪˈrɑːk/ (the
ionly pronunciation listed in the Oxford English Dictionary and the first one
iin Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary[34]) or /ɪˈræk/ (listed first by MQD),
ithe American Heritage Dictionary,[35] and the Random House Dictionary.[36]
iThe
ipronunciation /aɪˈræk/ is occasionally heard in US media.[citation needed]
i
iWhen the British established the Hashemite king on 23 August 1921, Faisal I
iof Iraq, the official English name of the country changed from Mesopotamia to
ithe endonymic Iraq.[37] Since January 1992, the official name of the state is
i"Republic of Iraq" (Jumhūrīyyet al-'Irāq), reaffirmed in the 2005
iConstitution.[1][38][39]
i
i===== History =====
i
iBetween 65,000 BC and 35,000 BC, northern Iraq was home to a Neanderthal
iculture, archaeological remains of which have been discovered at Shanidar
iCave[42] This same region is also the location of a number of pre-Neolithic
icemeteries, dating from approximately 11,000 BC.[43]
i
iSince approximately 10,000 BC, Iraq, together with a large part of the
iFertile Crescent also comprising Asia Minor and the Levant, was one of
icentres
iof a Neolithic culture known as Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA), where
iagriculture and cattle breeding appeared for the first time in the world. In
iIraq, this period has been excavated at sites like M'lefaat and Nemrik 9. The
ifollowing Neolithic period, PPNB, is represented by rectangular houses. At
ithe
itime of the pre-pottery Neolithic, people used vessels made of stone, gypsum
iand burnt lime (Vaisselle blanche). Finds of obsidian tools from Anatolia are
ievidences of early trade relations.
i
iFurther important sites of human advancement were Jarmo (circa 7100 BC),[43]
ia number of sites belonging to the Halaf culture, and Tell al-'Ubaid, the
itype
isite of the Ubaid period (between 6500 BC and 3800 BC).[44] The respective
iperiods show ever-increasing levels of advancement in agriculture,
itool-making
iand architecture.
i
iThe "Cradle of Civilisation" is thus a common term for the area comprising
imodern Iraq as it was home to the earliest known civilisation, the Sumerian
icivilisation, which arose in the fertile Tigris-Euphrates river valley of
isouthern Iraq in the Chalcolithic (Ubaid period).[45]
i
iIt was here, in the late 4th millennium BC, that the world's first writing
isystem and recorded history itself were born. The Sumerians were also the
ifirst to harness the wheel and create city states, and whose writings record
ithe first evidence of mathematics, astronomy, astrology, written law,
imedicine
iand organised religion.[45]
i
iThe language of the Sumerians is a language isolate. The major city states of
ithe early Sumerian period were; Eridu, Bad-tibira, Larsa, Sippar, Shuruppak,
iUruk, Kish, Ur, Nippur, Lagash, Girsu, Umma, Hamazi, Adab, Mari, Isin, Kutha,
iDer and Akshak.[45]
i
iThe cities to the north like Ashur, Arbela (modern Erbil) and Arrapha (modern
iKirkuk) were also extant in what was to be called Assyria from the 25th
icentury BC; however, at this early stage, they were Sumerian ruled
iadministrative centres.
i
iIn the 26th century BC, Eannatum of Lagash created what was perhaps the first
iempire in history, though this was short-lived. Later, Lugal-Zage-Si, the
ipriest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the Lagash dynasty in the area,
ithen conquered Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire extending
ifrom the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.[46] It was during this period
ithat
ithe Epic of Gilgamesh originates, which includes the tale of The Great Flood.
i
iFrom the 29th century BC, Akkadian Semitic names began to appear on king
ilists and administrative documents of various city states. It remains unknown
ias to the origin of Akkad, where it was precisely situated and how it rose to
iprominence. Its people spoke Akkadian, an East Semitic language.[47]
i
iBetween the 29th and 24th centuries BC, a number of kingdoms and city states
iwithin Iraq began to have Akkadian speaking dynasties; including Assyria,
iEkallatum, Isin and Larsa.
i
iHowever, the Sumerians remained generally dominant until the rise of the
iAkkadian Empire (2335–2124 BC), based in the city of Akkad in central Iraq.
iSargon of Akkad, originally a Rabshakeh to a Sumerian king, founded the
iempire, he conquered all of the city states of southern and central Iraq, and
isubjugated the kings of Assyria, thus uniting the Sumerians and Akkadians in
ione state.
i
iHe then set about expanding his empire, conquering Gutium, Elam in modern-day
iIran, and had victories that did not result into a full conquest against the
iAmorites and Eblaites of the Levant. The empire of Akkad likely fell in the
i22nd century BC, within 180 years of its founding, ushering in a "Dark Age"
iwith no prominent imperial authority until the Third Dynasty of Ur. The
iregion's political structure may have reverted to the status quo ante of
ilocal
igovernance by city-states.[48]
i
iAfter many years (and 4 kings) of chaos, Shu-turul and Dudu appear to have
irestored some centralised authority for several decades however they were
iunable to prevent the empire eventually collapsing outright, eventually
iceding
ipower to Gutians, based in Adab, who had been conquered by Akkad in the reign
iof Sharkalisharri.[49] After the collapse of the Akkadian Empire in the late
i22nd century BC, the Gutians occupied the south for a few decades, while
iAssyria reasserted its independence in the north. Most of southern
iMesopotamia
iwas again united under one ruler during the Ur III period, most notably
iduring
ithe rule of the prolific king Shulgi. His accomplishments include the
icompletion of construction of the Great Ziggurat of Ur, begun by his father
iUr-Nammu.[citation needed] .
i
iIn 1792 BC, an Amorite ruler named Hammurabi came to power in this state, and
iimmediately set about building Babylon from a minor town into a major city,
ideclaring himself its king. Hammurabi conquered the whole of southern and
icentral Iraq, as well as Elam to the east and Mari to the west, then engaged
iin a protracted war with the Assyrian king Ishme-Dagan for domination of the
iregion, creating the short-lived Babylonian Empire. He eventually prevailed
iover the successor of Ishme-Dagan and subjected Assyria and its Anatolian
icolonies. By the middle of the eighteenth century BC, the Sumerians had lost
itheir cultural identity and ceased to exist as a distinct people.[50][51]
iGenetic and cultural analysis indicates that the Marsh people of southern
iIraq
iare probably their most direct modern descendants.[52][53][54]
i
iIt is from the period of Hammurabi that southern Iraq came to be known as
iBabylonia, while the north had already coalesced into Assyria hundreds of
iyears before. However, his empire was short-lived, and rapidly collapsed
iafter
ihis death, with both Assyria and southern Iraq, in the form of the Sealand
iDynasty, falling back into native Akkadian hands.
i
iAfter this, another foreign people, the Language Isolate speaking Kassites,
iseized control of Babylonia, where they were to rule for almost 600 years, by
ifar the longest dynasty ever to rule in Babylon.
i
iIraq was from this point divided into three polities: Assyria in the north,
iKassite Babylonia in the south central region, and the Sealand Dynasty in the
ifar south. The Sealand Dynasty was finally conquered by Kassite Babylonia
icirca 1380 BC. The origin of the Kassites is uncertain, though a number of
itheories have been advanced.[55]
i
iThe Middle Assyrian Empire (1365–1020 BC) saw Assyria rise to be the most
ipowerful nation in the known world. Beginning with the campaigns of
iAshur-uballit I, Assyria destroyed the rival Hurrian-Mitanni Empire, annexed
ihuge swathes of the Hittite Empire for itself, annexed northern Babylonia
ifrom
ithe Kassites, forced the Egyptian Empire from the region, and defeated the
iElamites, Phrygians, Canaanites, Phoenicians, Cilicians, Gutians, Dilmunites
iand Arameans. At its height, the Middle Assyrian Empire stretched from The
iCaucasus to Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and from the Mediterranean coasts of
iPhoenicia to the Zagros Mountains of Iran. In 1235 BC, Tukulti-Ninurta I of
iAssyria took the throne of Babylon.
i
iDuring the Bronze Age collapse (1200–900 BC), Babylonia was in a state of
ichaos, dominated for long periods by Assyria and Elam. The Kassites were
idriven from power by Assyria and Elam, allowing native south Mesopotamian
ikings to rule Babylonia for the first time, although often subject to
iAssyrian
ior Elamite rulers. However, these East Semitic Akkadian kings, were unable to
iprevent new waves of West Semitic migrants entering southern Iraq, and during
ithe 11th century BC Arameans and Suteans entered Babylonia from The Levant,
iand these were followed in the late 10th to early 9th century BC by the
iChaldeans who were West Semitic migrants to the southeastern corner of the
iregion.[56] However, the Chaldeans were absorbed and assimilated into the
iindigenous population of Babylonia.[57]
i
iAfter a period of comparative decline in Assyria, it once more began to
iexpand with the Neo Assyrian Empire (935–605 BC). Because of its geopolitical
idominance and ideology based in world domination, the Neo-Assyrian Empire is
iby many researchers regarded to have been the first world empire in
ihistory.[58][59] At its height, the empire was the strongest military power
iin
ithe world[60] and ruled over all of Mesopotamia, the Levant and Egypt, as
iwell
ias portions of Anatolia, Arabia and modern-day Iran and Armenia. Under rulers
isuch as Adad-Nirari II, Ashurnasirpal, Shalmaneser III, Semiramis,
iTiglath-pileser III, Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon and Ashurbanipal,
iIraq
ibecame the centre of an empire stretching from Persia, Parthia and Elam in
ithe
ieast, to Cyprus and Antioch in the west, and from The Caucasus in the north
ito
iEgypt, Nubia and Arabia in the south.[61]
i
iIt was during this period that an Akkadian influenced form of Eastern Aramaic
iwas adopted by the Assyrians as the lingua franca of their vast empire, and
iMesopotamian Aramaic began to supplant Akkadian as the spoken language of the
igeneral populace of both Assyria and Babylonia. The descendant dialects of
ithis tongue survive amongst the Mandaeans of southern Iraq and Assyrians of
inorthern Iraq to this day. The Arabs and the Chaldeans are first mentioned in
iwritten history (circa 850 BC) in the annals of Shalmaneser III.
i
iThe Neo-Assyrian Empire left a legacy of great cultural significance. The
ipolitical structures established by the Neo-Assyrian Empire became the model
ifor the later empires that succeeded it and the ideology of universal rule
ipromulgated by the Neo-Assyrian kings inspired, through the concept of
itranslatio imperii, similar ideas of rights to world domination in later
iempires as late as the early modern period. The Neo-Assyrian Empire became an
iimportant part of later folklore and literary traditions in northern
iMesopotamia through the subsequent post-imperial period and beyond. Judaism,
iand thus in turn also Christianity and Islam, was profoundly affected by the
iperiod of Neo-Assyrian rule; numerous Biblical stories appear to draw on
iearlier Assyrian mythology and history and the Assyrian impact on early
iJewish
itheology was immense. Although the Neo-Assyrian Empire is prominently
iremembered today for the supposed excessive brutality of the Neo-Assyrian
iarmy, the Assyrians were not excessively brutal when compared to other
icivilizations of their time, nor when compared to other civilizations
ithroughout human history.[62][63]
i
iIn the late 7th century BC, the Assyrian Empire tore itself apart with a
iseries of brutal civil wars, weakening itself to such a degree that a
icoalition of its former subjects; the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes,
iPersians,
iParthians, Scythians and Cimmerians, were able to attack Assyria, finally
ibringing its empire down by 605 BC.[64]
i
iThe short-lived Neo-Babylonian Empire (620–539 BC) succeeded that of Assyria.
iIt failed to attain the size, power or longevity of its predecessor; however,
iit came to dominate The Levant, Canaan, Arabia, Israel and Judah, and to
idefeat Egypt. Initially, Babylon was ruled by yet another foreign dynasty,
ithat of the Chaldeans, who had migrated to the region in the late 10th or
iearly 9th century BC. Its greatest king, Nebuchadnezzar II, rivalled another
inon native ruler, the ethnically unrelated Amorite king Hammurabi, as the
igreatest king of Babylon. However, by 556 BC, the Chaldeans had been deposed
ifrom power by the Assyrian born Nabonidus and his son and regent
iBelshazzar.[citation needed] The defeat of the Assyrians and the transfer of
iempire to Babylon marked the first time the city, and southern Mesopotamia in
igeneral, had risen to dominate the Ancient Near East since the collapse of
iHammurabi's Old Babylonian Empire nearly a thousand years prior. The period
iof
iNeo-Babylonian rule thus saw unprecedented economic and population growth
ithroughout Babylonia and a renaissance of culture and artwork, with the
iNeo-Babylonian kings conducting massive building projects, especially in
iBabylon itself, and bringing back many elements from the previous 2,000 or so
iyears of Sumero-Akkadian culture. The empire was the last of the Mesopotamian
iempires to be ruled by monarchs native to Mesopotamia.[65][better source
ineeded] Nebuchadnezzar II succeeded Nabopolassar in 605 BC following the
ideath
iof his father. The empire Nebuchadnezzar inherited was among the most
ipowerful
iin the world, in which he quickly reinforced his father's alliance with the
iMedes by marrying Cyaxares's daughter or granddaughter, Amytis. Some sources
isuggest that the famous Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders
iof the Ancient World, were built by Nebuchadnezzar for his wife as to remind
iher of her homeland (though the existence of these gardens is debated).
iNebuchadnezzar's 43-year reign would bring with it a golden age for Babylon,
iwhich was to become the most powerful kingdom in the Middle East.[66]
i
iIn the 6th century BC, Cyrus the Great of neighbouring Persia defeated the
iNeo-Babylonian Empire at the Battle of Opis and Mesopotamia was subsumed into
ithe Achaemenid Empire for nearly two centuries. The Achaemenids made Babylon
itheir main capital. The Chaldeans and Chaldea disappeared at around this
itime,
ithough both Assyria and Babylonia endured and thrived under Achaemenid rule
i(see Achaemenid Assyria). Their kings retained Assyrian Imperial Aramaic as
ithe language of empire, together with the Assyrian imperial infrastructure,
iand an Assyrian style of art and architecture.[citation needed]
i
iIn the late 4th century BC, Alexander the Great conquered the region, putting
iit under Hellenistic Seleucid rule for over two centuries.[67] The Seleucids
iintroduced the Indo-Anatolian and Greek term Syria to the region. This name
ihad for many centuries been the Indo-European word for Assyria and
ispecifically and only meant Assyria; however, the Seleucids also applied it
ito
ithe Levant (Aramea), causing both the Assyrians of Iraq and the Arameans of
ithe Levant to be called "Syrians/Syriacs" in the Greco-Roman world.[68]
i
iThe Parthians (247 BC – 224 AD) from Persia conquered the region during the
ireign of Mithridates I of Parthia (r. 171–138 BC). From northwestern
iMesopotamia, the Romans invaded western parts of the region several times,
ibriefly founding Assyria Provincia in Assyria. Christianity began to take
ihold
iin Iraq (particularly in Assyria) between the 1st and 3rd centuries, and
iAssyria became a centre of Syriac Christianity, the Church of the East and
iSyriac literature. A number of independent states evolved in the north during
ithe Parthian era, such as Adiabene, Assur, Osroene and Hatra.[citation
ineeded]
i
iThe Sassanids of Persia under Ardashir I destroyed the Parthian Empire and
iconquered the region in 224 AD. During the 240s and 250's AD, the Sassanids
igradually conquered the independent states, culminating with Assur in 256 AD.
iThe region was thus a province of the Sassanid Empire for over four
icenturies,
iand became the frontier and battle ground between the Sassanid Empire and
iByzantine Empire, with both empires weakening each other, paving the way for
ithe Arab-Muslim conquest of the Mesopotamia in the mid-7th century.[citation
ineeded]
i
iThe first organised conflict between invading Arab-Muslim tribes and
ioccupying Persian forces in Mesopotamia seems to have been in 634, when the
iArabs were defeated at the Battle of the Bridge. There was a force of some
i5,000 Muslims under Abū `Ubayd ath-Thaqafī, which was routed by the Persians.
iThis was followed by Khalid ibn al-Walid's successful campaign which saw all
iof Iraq come under Arab rule within a year, with the exception of the Persian
iEmpire's capital, Ctesiphon. Around 636, a larger Arab Muslim force under
iSa`d
iibn Abī Waqqās defeated the main Persian army at the Battle of al-Qādisiyyah
iand moved on to capture the Persian capital of Ctesiphon. By the end of 638,
ithe Muslims had conquered all of the Western Sassanid provinces (including
imodern Iraq), and the last Sassanid Emperor, Yazdegerd III, had fled to
icentral and then northern Persia, where he was killed in 651.[69]
i
iThe Islamic expansions constituted the largest of the Semitic expansions in
ihistory. These new arrivals did not disperse and settle throughout the
icountry; instead they established two new garrison cities, at Kufa, near
iancient Babylon, and at Basra in the south and established Islam in these
icities, while the north remained largely Assyrian and Christian in
icharacter.[69]
i
iThe Abbasid Caliphate built the city of Baghdad along the Tigris in the 8th
icentury as its capital, and the city became the leading metropolis of the
iArab
iand Muslim world for five centuries. Baghdad was the largest multicultural
icity of the Middle Ages, peaking at a population of more than a million,[70]
iand was the centre of learning during the Islamic Golden Age. The Mongols
idestroyed the city and burned its library during the siege of Baghdad in the
i13th century.[71]
i
iIn 1257, Hulagu Khan amassed an unusually large army, a significant portion
iof the Mongol Empire's forces, for the purpose of conquering Baghdad. When
ithey arrived at the Islamic capital, Hulagu Khan demanded its surrender, but
ithe last Abbasid Caliph Al-Musta'sim refused. This angered Hulagu, and,
iconsistent with Mongol strategy of discouraging resistance, he besieged
iBaghdad, sacked the city and massacred many of the inhabitants.[72] Estimates
iof the number of dead range from 200,000 to a million.[73]
i
iThe Mongols destroyed the Abbasid Caliphate and Baghdad's House of Wisdom,
iwhich contained countless precious and historical documents. The city has
inever regained its previous pre-eminence as a major centre of culture and
iinfluence. Some historians believe that the Mongol invasion destroyed much of
ithe irrigation infrastructure that had sustained Mesopotamia for millennia.
iOther historians point to soil salination as the culprit in the decline in
iagriculture.[74]
i
iThe mid-14th-century Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world.[75] The
ibest estimate for the Middle East is a death rate of roughly one-third.[76]
i
iIn 1401, a warlord of Mongol descent, Tamerlane (Timur Lenk), invaded Iraq.
iAfter the capture of Baghdad, 20,000 of its citizens were massacred.[77]
iTimur
iordered that every soldier should return with at least two severed human
iheads
ito show him (many warriors were so scared they killed prisoners captured
iearlier in the campaign just to ensure they had heads to present to
iTimur).[78] Timur also conducted massacres of the indigenous Assyrian
iChristian population, hitherto still the majority population in northern
iMesopotamia, and it was during this time that the ancient Assyrian city of
iAssur was finally abandoned.[79]
i
iDuring the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the Black Sheep Turkmen ruled
ithe area now known as Iraq. In 1466, the White Sheep Turkmen defeated the
iBlack Sheep and took control. From the earliest 16th century, in 1508, as
iwith
iall territories of the former White Sheep Turkmen, Iraq fell into the hands
iof
ithe Iranian Safavids. Owing to the century long Turco-Iranian rivalry between
ithe Safavids and the neighbouring Ottoman Turks, Iraq would be contested
ibetween the two for more than a hundred years during the frequent
iOttoman-Persian Wars.
i
iWith the Treaty of Zuhab in 1639, most of the territory of present-day Iraq
ieventually came under the control of Ottoman Empire as the eyalet of Baghdad
ias a result of wars with the neighbouring rival, Safavid Iran. Throughout
imost
iof the period of Ottoman rule (1533–1918), the territory of present-day Iraq
iwas a battle zone between the rival regional empires and tribal alliances.
i
iBy the 17th century, the frequent conflicts with the Safavids had sapped the
istrength of the Ottoman Empire and had weakened its control over its
iprovinces. The nomadic population swelled with the influx of bedouins from
iNajd, in the Arabian Peninsula. Bedouin raids on settled areas became
iimpossible to curb.[80]
i
iDuring the years 1747–1831, Iraq was ruled by a Mamluk dynasty of
iGeorgian[81] origin who succeeded in obtaining autonomy from the Ottoman
iPorte, suppressed tribal revolts, curbed the power of the Janissaries,
irestored order and introduced a programme of modernisation of economy and
imilitary. In 1831, the Ottomans managed to overthrow the Mamluk regime and
iimposed their direct control over Iraq. The population of Iraq, estimated at
i30 million in 800 AD, was only 5 million at the start of the 20th
icentury.[82]
i
iDuring World War I, the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers.
iIn the Mesopotamian campaign against the Central Powers, British forces
iinvaded the country and initially suffered a major defeat at the hands of the
iTurkish army during the Siege of Kut (1915–1916). However, subsequent to this
ithe British began to gain the upper hand, and were further aided by the
isupport of local Arabs and Assyrians. In 1916, the British and French made a
iplan for the post-war division of Western Asia under the Sykes-Picot
iAgreement.[83] British forces regrouped and captured Baghdad in 1917, and
idefeated the Ottomans. An armistice was signed in 1918. The British lost
i92,000 soldiers in the Mesopotamian campaign. Ottoman losses are unknown but
ithe British captured a total of 45,000 prisoners of war. By the end of 1918,
ithe British had deployed 410,000 men in the area, of which 112,000 were
icombat
itroops.[citation needed]
i
iDuring the Ottoman Empire until the partition of the Ottoman Empire in the
i20th century, Iraq was made up of three provinces, called vilayets in the
iOttoman language: Mosul Vilayet, Baghdad Vilayet, and Basra Vilayet. These
ithree provinces were joined into one Kingdom by the British after the region
ibecame a League of Nations mandate, administered under British control, with
ithe name "State of Iraq". A fourth province (Zor Sanjak), which Iraqi
inationalists considered part of Upper Mesopotamia was ultimately added to
iSyria.[84][85] In line with their "Sharifian Solution" policy, the British
iestablished the Hashemite king on 23 August 1921, Faisal I of Iraq, who had
ibeen forced out of Syria by the French, as their client ruler. The official
iEnglish name of the country simultaneously changed from Mesopotamia to the
iendonymic Iraq.[37] Likewise, British authorities selected Sunni Arab elites
ifrom the region for appointments to government and ministry
ioffices.[specify][86][page needed][87]
i
iFaced with spiralling costs and influenced by the public protestations of the
iwar hero T. E. Lawrence[88] in The Times, Britain replaced Arnold Wilson in
iOctober 1920 with a new Civil Commissioner, Sir Percy Cox.[89] Cox managed to
iquell a rebellion, yet was also responsible for implementing the fateful
ipolicy of close co-operation with Iraq's Sunni minority.[90] The institution
iof slavery was abolished in the 1920s.[91]
i
iBritain granted independence to the Kingdom of Iraq in 1932,[92] on the
iurging of King Faisal, though the British retained military bases, local
imilitia in the form of Assyrian Levies, and transit rights for their forces.
iKing Ghazi ruled as a figurehead after King Faisal's death in 1933, while
iundermined by attempted military coups, until his death in 1939. Ghazi was
ifollowed by his underage son, Faisal II. 'Abd al-Ilah served as Regent during
iFaisal's minority.[citation needed]
i
iOn 1 April 1941, Rashid Ali Al-Gilani and members of the Golden Square staged
ia coup d'état and overthrew the government of 'Abd al-Ilah. During the
isubsequent Anglo-Iraqi War, the United Kingdom (which still maintained air
ibases in Iraq) invaded Iraq for fear that the Rashid Ali government might cut
ioil supplies to Western nations because of his links to the Axis powers. The
iwar started on 2 May, and the British, together with loyal Assyrian
iLevies,[93] defeated the forces of Al-Gilani, forcing an armistice on 31
iMay.[citation needed]
i
iNuri Said served as the prime minister during the Kingdom of Iraq, and was a
imajor political figure in Iraq under the monarchy. During his many terms in
ioffice, he was involved in some of the key policy decisions that shaped the
imodern Iraqi state. In 1930, during his first term, he signed the Anglo-Iraqi
iTreaty, which, as a step toward greater independence, granted Britain the
iunlimited right to station its armed forces in and transit military units
ithrough Iraq and also gave legitimacy to British control of the country's oil
iindustry. In addition, Said contributed to the establishment of the Kingdom
iof
iIraq and the Iraqi army.[citation needed]
i
iA military occupation followed the restoration of the pre-coup government of
ithe Hashemite monarchy. The occupation ended on 26 October 1947, although
iBritain was to retain military bases in Iraq until 1954, after which the
iAssyrian militias were disbanded. The rulers during the occupation and the
iremainder of the Hashemite monarchy were Nuri as-Said, the autocratic Prime
iMinister, who also ruled from 1930 to 1932, and 'Abd al-Ilah, the former
iRegent who now served as an adviser to King Faisal II.[citation needed]
i
iIn 1958, a coup d'état known as the 14 July Revolution was led by the
iBrigadier General and nationalist Abd al-Karim Qasim. This revolt was
istrongly
ianti-imperial and anti-monarchical in nature and had strong socialist
ielements. Numerous people were killed in the coup, including King Faysal II,
iPrince Abd al-Ilah, and Nuri al-Sa'id.[94] Qasim controlled Iraq through
imilitary rule and in 1958 he began a process of forcibly reducing the surplus
iamounts of land owned by a few citizens and having the state redistribute the
iland. He was overthrown by Colonel Abdul Salam Arif in a February 1963 coup.
iAfter the latter's death in 1966, he was succeeded by his brother, Abdul
iRahman Arif, who was overthrown by the Ba'ath Party in 1968.[95][96]
i
iAhmed Hassan al-Bakr became the first Ba'ath President of Iraq but then the
imovement gradually came under the control of Saddam Hussein, who acceded to
ithe presidency and control of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), then
iIraq's supreme executive body, in July 1979.
i
iIn 1979, the Iranian Revolution took place. Following months of cross-border
iraids between the two countries, Saddam declared war on Iran in September
i1980, initiating the Iran–Iraq War (or First Persian Gulf War). Taking
iadvantage of the post-revolution chaos in Iran, Iraq captured some
iterritories
iin southwest of Iran, but Iran recaptured all of the lost territories within
itwo years, and for the next six years Iran was on the offensive.[97][page
ineeded] The war, which ended in stalemate in 1988, had cost the lives of
ibetween half a million and 1.5 million people.[98]
i
iIn 1981, Israeli aircraft bombed an Iraqi nuclear materials testing reactor
iat Osirak and was widely criticised at the United Nations.[99][100] During
ithe
ieight-year war with Iran, Saddam Hussein extensively used chemical weapons
iagainst Iranians.[101] In the final stages of the Iran–Iraq War, the
iBa'athist
iIraqi regime led the Al-Anfal Campaign, a genocidal[102] campaign that
itargeted Iraqi Kurds,[103][104][105] and led to the killing of 50,000–100,000
icivilians.[106]
i
iDue to Iraq's inability to pay Kuwait more than US$14 billion that it had
iborrowed to finance the Iran–Iraq War and Kuwait's surge in petroleum
iproduction levels which kept revenues down, Iraq interpreted Kuwait's refusal
ito decrease its oil production as an act of aggression.[107] Throughout much
iof the 1980s, Kuwait's oil production was above its mandatory OPEC quota,
iwhich kept the oil prices down.[108]
i
iIn August 1990 Iraq invaded and annexed Kuwait. This subsequently led to
imilitary intervention by United States-led forces in the First Gulf War. The
icoalition forces proceeded with a bombing campaign targeting military
itargets[109][110][111] and then launched a 100-hour-long ground assault
iagainst Iraqi forces in Southern Iraq and those occupying Kuwait.
i
iIraq's armed forces were devastated during the war. Shortly after it ended in
i1991, Kurdish Iraqis led several uprisings against Saddam Hussein's regime,
ibut these were successfully repressed using the Iraqi security forces and
ichemical weapons. It is estimated that as many as 100,000 people, including
imany civilians were killed.[112] During the uprisings the US, UK, France and
iTurkey, claiming authority under UNSCR 688, established the Iraqi no-fly
izones
ito protect Kurdish population from attacks by the Saddam regime's fixed-wing
iaircraft (but not helicopters).
i
iIraq was ordered to destroy its chemical and biological weapons and the UN
iattempted to compel Saddam's government to disarm and agree to a ceasefire by
iimposing additional sanctions on the country in addition to the initial
isanctions imposed following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. The Iraqi Government's
ifailure to disarm and agree to a ceasefire resulted in sanctions which
iremained in place until 2003. The effects of the sanctions on the civilian
ipopulation of Iraq have been disputed.[113][114] Whereas it was widely
ibelieved that the sanctions caused a major rise in child mortality, recent
iresearch has shown that commonly cited data were fabricated by the Iraqi
igovernment and that "there was no major rise in child mortality in Iraq after
i1990 and during the period of the sanctions."[115][116][117] An oil for food
iprogram was established in 1996 to ease the effects of sanctions.
i
iFollowing the September 11 attacks, the George W. Bush administration began
iplanning the overthrow of Saddam's government and in October 2002, the US
iCongress passed the Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States
iArmed Forces Against Iraq. In November 2002, the UN Security Council passed
iUNSCR 1441 and in March 2003 the United States and its allies invaded
iIraq.[citation needed]
i
iOn 20 March 2003, a United States-organised coalition invaded Iraq, under the
ipretext that Iraq had failed to abandon its weapons of mass destruction
iprogram in violation of UN Resolution 687. This claim was based on documents
iprovided by the CIA and the British government that were later found to be
iunreliable.[118][119][120] It has been argued though, that under the pretext
iof promoting peace and democracy and remove Iraq's nuclear, biological and/or
ichemical weapons, the U.S. actually were pursuing national objectives to
iincrease U.S. hegemony or expand their spheres of power in the Middle East or
iglobally.[121]
i
iFollowing the invasion, the United States established the Coalition
iProvisional Authority to govern Iraq. In May 2003 L. Paul Bremer, the chief
iexecutive of the CPA, issued orders to exclude Ba'ath Party members from the
inew Iraqi government (CPA Order 1) and to disband the Iraqi Army (CPA Order
i2).[122] The decision dissolved the largely Sunni Iraqi Army and excluded
imany
iof the country's former government officials from participating in the
icountry's governance,[123] including 40,000 school teachers who had joined
ithe
iBa'ath Party simply to keep their jobs,[124] helping to bring about a chaotic
ipost-invasion environment.[125]
i
iAn insurgency against the US-led coalition-rule of Iraq began in summer 2003
iwithin elements of the former Iraqi secret police and army, who formed
iguerrilla units. In fall 2003, self-entitled 'jihadist' groups began
itargeting
icoalition forces. Various Sunni militias were created in 2003, for example
iJama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. The insurgency
iincluded intense inter-ethnic violence between Sunnis and Shias.[126] The Abu
iGhraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal came to light, late 2003 in reports
iby Amnesty International and Associated Press.
i
iThe Mahdi Army—a Shia militia created in the summer of 2003 by Muqtada
ial-Sadr—began to fight Coalition forces in April 2004.[127] 2004 saw Sunni
iand
iShia militants fighting against each other and against the new Iraqi Interim
iGovernment installed in June 2004, and against Coalition forces, as well as
ithe First Battle of Fallujah in April and Second Battle of Fallujah in
iNovember. The Mahdi army would kidnap Sunni civilians as part of a genocide
ithat occurred against them.[128]
i
iIn January 2005, the first elections since the invasion took place and in
iOctober a new Constitution was approved,[1] which was followed by
iparliamentary elections in December. However, insurgent attacks were common
iand increased to 34,131 in 2005 from 26,496 in 2004.[129]
i
iDuring 2006, fighting continued and reached its highest levels of violence,
imore war crimes scandals were made public, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi the leader of
iAl-Qaeda in Iraq was killed by US forces and Iraq's former dictator Saddam
iHussein was sentenced to death for crimes against humanity and
ihanged.[130][131][132] In late 2006, the US government's Iraq Study Group
irecommended that the US begin focusing on training Iraqi military personnel
iand in January 2007 US President George W. Bush announced a "Surge" in the
inumber of US troops deployed to the country.[133]
i
iIn May 2007, Iraq's Parliament called on the United States to set a timetable
ifor withdrawal and US coalition partners such as the UK and Denmark began
iwithdrawing their forces from the country.[134][135][136] The war in Iraq has
iresulted in between 151,000 and 1.2 million Iraqis being killed.[137][138]
i
iIn 2008, fighting continued and Iraq's newly trained armed forces launched
iattacks against militants. The Iraqi government signed the US–Iraq Status of
iForces Agreement, which required US forces to withdraw from Iraqi cities by
i30
iJune 2009 and to withdraw completely from Iraq by 31 December 2011.
i
iUS troops handed over security duties to Iraqi forces in June 2009, though
ithey continued to work with Iraqi forces after the pullout.[139] On the
imorning of 18 December 2011, the final contingent of US troops to be
iwithdrawn
iceremonially exited over the border to Kuwait.[19] Crime and violence
iinitially spiked in the months following the US withdrawal from cities in
imid-2009[140][141] but despite the initial increase in violence, in November
i2009, Iraqi Interior Ministry officials reported that the civilian death toll
iin Iraq fell to its lowest level since the 2003 invasion.[142]
i
iFollowing the withdrawal of US troops in 2011, the insurgency continued and
iIraq suffered from political instability. In February 2011, the Arab Spring
iprotests spread to Iraq;[143] but the initial protests did not topple the
igovernment. The Iraqi National Movement, reportedly representing the majority
iof Iraqi Sunnis, boycotted Parliament for several weeks in late 2011 and
iearly
i2012, claiming that the Shiite-dominated government was striving to sideline
iSunnis.
i
iIn 2012 and 2013, levels of violence increased and armed groups inside Iraq
iwere increasingly galvanised by the Syrian Civil War. Both Sunnis and Shias
icrossed the border to fight in Syria.[144] In December 2012, Sunni Arabs
iprotested against the government, who they claimed marginalised
ithem.[145][146]
i
iDuring 2013, Sunni militant groups stepped up attacks targeting the Iraq's
ipopulation in an attempt to undermine confidence in the Nouri al-Maliki-led
igovernment.[147]
i
iIn 2014, Sunni insurgents belonging to the Islamic State terrorist group
iseized control of large swathes of land including several major Iraqi cities,
ilike Tikrit, Fallujah and Mosul creating hundreds of thousands of internally
idisplaced persons amid reports of atrocities by ISIL fighters.[148]
i
iOn 4 June 2014, the insurgents began their efforts to capture Mosul. The
iIraqi army officially had 30,000 soldiers and another 30,000 federal police
istationed in the city, facing a 1,500-member attacking force. The Iraqi
iforces' actual numbers were much lower due to "ghost soldiers", severely
ireducing combat ability.[149] After six days of combat and massive
idesertions,
iIraqi soldiers received orders to retreat. The city of Mosul, including Mosul
iInternational Airport and the helicopters located there, all fell under
iISIL's
icontrol. An estimated 500,000 civilians fled from the city.
i
iBy late June, the Iraqi government had lost control of its borders with both
iJordan and Syria.[150] al-Maliki called for a national state of emergency on
i10 June following the attack on Mosul, which had been seized overnight.
iHowever, despite the security crisis, Iraq's parliament did not allow Maliki
ito declare a state of emergency; many legislators boycotted the session
ibecause they opposed expanding the prime minister's powers.[151]
i
iA former commander of the Iraqi ground forces, Ali Ghaidan, accused former
iPrime Minister Nuri al-Maliki of being the one who issued the order to
iwithdraw from the city of Mosul.[152]
i
iAfter an inconclusive election in April 2014, Nouri al-Maliki served as
icaretaker-Prime-Minister.[153] On 11 August, Iraq's highest court ruled that
iPM Maliki's bloc was the largest in parliament, meaning Maliki could stay
iPrime Minister.[153] By 13 August, however, the Iraqi president had tasked
iHaider al-Abadi with forming a new government, and the United Nations, the
iUnited States, the European Union, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and some Iraqi
ipoliticians expressed their wish for a new leadership in Iraq, for example
ifrom Haider al-Abadi.[154] On 14 August, Maliki stepped down as PM to support
iMr al-Abadi and to "safeguard the high interests of the country". The US
igovernment welcomed this as "another major step forward" in uniting
iIraq.[155][156] On 9 September 2014, Haider al-Abadi had formed a new
igovernment and became the new prime minister.[citation needed] On assuming
ipower, Abadi promised to stamp out corruption and ease sectarian
itensions.[157] Intermittent conflict between Sunni, Shia and Kurdish factions
ihas led to increasing debate about the splitting of Iraq into three
iautonomous
iregions, including Kurdistan in the northeast, a Sunni state in the west and
ia
iShia state in the southeast.[158]
i
iIn response to rapid territorial gains made by the Islamic State during the
ifirst half of 2014, and its universally-condemned executions and reported
ihuman rights abuses, many states began to intervene against it in the War in
iIraq (2013–2017). Since the airstrikes started, ISIL has been losing ground
iin
iboth Iraq and Syria.[160] Tens of thousands of civilians have been killed in
iIraq in ISIL-linked violence.[161][162] The genocide of Yazidis by ISIL has
iled to the expulsion, flight and effective exile of the Yazidis from their
iancestral lands in northern Iraq.[163] The 2016 Karrada bombing killed nearly
i400 civilians and injured hundreds more.[164] On 17 March 2017, a US-led
icoalition airstrike in Mosul killed more than 200 civilians.[165]
i
iSince 2015, ISIL lost territory in Iraq, including Tikrit in March and April
i2015,[166] Baiji in October 2015,[167] Sinjar in November 2015,[168] Ramadi
iin
iDecember 2015,[169] Fallujah in June 2016[170] and Mosul in July 2017. By
iDecember 2017, ISIL had no remaining territory in Iraq, following the 2017
iWestern Iraq campaign.[171]
i
iIn September 2017, a referendum was held regarding Kurdish independence in
iIraq. 92% of Iraqi Kurds voted in favor of independence.[172] The referendum
iwas regarded as illegal by the federal government in Baghdad.[173] On 9
iDecember 2017, then-Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory
iover
iISIL and announced full liberation of borders with Syria from Islamic State
imilitants.[174]
i
iIn March 2018, Turkey launched military operations to eliminate active
iKurdish separatist fighters in the far north of the country.[176] Shia cleric
iMuqtada al-Sadr's political coalition won Iraq's parliamentary election in
iMay
i2018.[177]
i
iSerious civil unrest rocked the country beginning in Baghdad and Najaf in
iJuly 2018 and spreading to other provinces in September 2018 as rallies to
iprotest corruption, unemployment, and public service failures turned
iviolent.[178] Protests and demonstrations started again on 1 October 2019,
iagainst 16 years of corruption, unemployment and inefficient public services,
ibefore they escalated into calls to overthrow the administration and to stop
iIranian intervention in Iraq. The Iraqi government at times reacted harshly,
iresulting in over 500 deaths by 12 December 2019.
i
iOn 27 December 2019, the K-1 Air Base in Iraq was attacked by more than 30
irockets, killing a U.S. civilian contractor and injuring others. The U.S.
iblamed the Iranian-backed Kata'ib Hezbollah militia. Later that month, the
iUnited States bombed five Kata'ib Hezbollah militia's positions in Iraq and
iSyria, in retaliation and in which, per Iraqi sources, at least 25 militia
ifighters were killed. On 31 December, after attending the funeral for one of
ithe killed militiamen, dozens of Iraqi Shia militiamen and their supporters
imarched into the Green Zone of Baghdad and surrounded the U.S. embassy
icompound (see article: Attack on the United States embassy in Baghdad).
iDemonstrators smashed a door of the checkpoint, set fire to the reception
iarea, left anti-American posters and sprayed anti-American graffiti. U.S.
ipresident Trump accused Iran of orchestrating the attack.
i
iThree days later, amid rising tensions between the United States and Iran,
ithe U.S. launched a drone strike on a convoy traveling near Baghdad
iInternational Airport, killing Qasem Soleimani, Iranian major-general and
iIslamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and Quds Force commander, the second
imost powerful person of Iran;[179] Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, deputy commander of
iIraq's Popular Mobilization Forces (PMF or PMU); four senior Iranian
iofficers;
iand four Iraqi officers.
i
iFollowing months of protests that broke out across Iraq in October 2019 and
ithe resignation of Prime Minister Adel Abdul Mahdi and his cabinet, Mustafa
ial-Kadhimi became a leading contender for the Premiership.[180] On 9 April
i2020, he was named by President Barham Salih as prime minister-designate and
ias the third person tapped as such in 10 weeks. This was specifically shortly
iafter the designated leader Adnan al-Zurfi withdrew, lacking enough support
ito
iassemble a government.[181]
i
iIn November 2021, the Iraqi Prime Minister al-Kadhimi survived a failed
iassassination attempt.[182]
i
iOn 30 November 2021, the political bloc led by Shia leader Muqtada al-Sadr
iwas confirmed the winner of the October election. His Sadrist Movement, won
i73
iout of the 329 seats in the parliament. The Taqadum, or Progress Party – led
iby Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi, a Sunni – secured 37 seats. Former Prime
iMinister Nouri al-Maliki's State of Law party got 33 seats. The Kurdistan
iDemocratic Party (KDP) received 31 seats, and the Patriotic Union of
iKurdistan
i(PUK) gained 18.[183] The (al-) Fatah Alliance, whose main components are
imilitia groups affiliated with the Iran-backed Popular Mobilisation Forces,
ilost support, with 17 seats.
i
iA period of political crisis and near-deadlock of eleven months followed,
iuntil in October 2022 a new President and new Prime Minister would assume
ioffice.[184] In June 2022, all 73 members of Parliament from the Sadrist
iMovement resigned, which is considered to be a move of Muqtada al-Sadr to
ideligitimize the remaining, rivalling, Shia parties still in the Parliament
iand demonstrate his rejection of the muhasasa (quota-based) system
iestablished
iin 2003 by the US occupation to divide political positions, public offices
iand
istate resources along ethno-sectarian lines (Sunni, Shia, Kurdish, Turkmen,
iChristian, etc.) which is believed to have bolstered sectarian and religious
iidentities while tearing up national unity and plunging Iraq into a
isect-coded
icivil war flaring high in the years 2006–08.[185]
i
iOn 27 July 2022, the parliament building was stormed by protesters for the
isecond time in a week.[186] Around 5 September, negotiations continued about
iselecting a new President and a working coalition; difficult issues were
iconfidence and supply arrangement between the parties, while the sitting
iPrime
iMinister strove for fresh elections.[187] However, in October 2022, Abdul
iLatif Rashid was elected as the new President of Iraq after winning the
iparliamentary election against incumbent Barham Salih, who was running for a
isecond term. The presidency is largely ceremonial and is traditionally held
iby
ia Kurd.[188] And on 27 October 2022, Mohammed Shia al-Sudani, close ally of
iformer Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, took the office to succeed Mustafa
ial-Kadhimi as new Prime Minister of Iraq.[189]
i
i===== Geography =====
i
iIraq lies between latitudes 29° and 38° N, and longitudes 39° and 49° E (a
ismall area lies west of 39°). Spanning 437,072 km2 (168,754 sq mi), it is the
i58th-largest country in the world. It is comparable in size to the US state
iof
iCalifornia, and somewhat larger than Paraguay.
i
iIraq has a coastline measuring 58 km (36 miles) on the northern Persian
iGulf.[190] Further north, but below the main headwaters only, the country
ieasily encompasses the Mesopotamian Alluvial Plain. Two major rivers, the
iTigris and Euphrates, run south through Iraq and into the Shatt al-Arab,
ithence the Persian Gulf. Broadly flanking this estuary (known as arvandrūd:
iاروندرود among Iranians) are marshlands, semi-agricultural. Many were drained
iin the 1990s and later revived. Flanking and between the two major rivers are
ifertile alluvial plains, as the rivers carry about 60,000,000 m3 (78,477,037
icu yd) of silt annually to the delta. The central part of the south, which
islightly tapers in favour of other countries, is natural vegetation marsh
imixed with rice paddies and is humid, relative to the rest of the plains.
i
iIraq has the northwestern end of the Zagros mountain range and the eastern
ipart of the Syrian Desert.
i
iRocky deserts cover about 40 percent of Iraq. Another 30 percent is
imountainous with bitterly cold winters. The north of the country is mostly
icomposed of mountains; the highest point being at 3,611 m (11,847 ft) point,
iunnamed on the map opposite, but known locally as Cheekah Dar (black tent).
i
iIraq is home to seven terrestrial ecoregions: Zagros Mountains forest steppe,
iMiddle East steppe, Mesopotamian Marshes, Eastern Mediterranean
iconifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests, Arabian Desert, Mesopotamian shrub
idesert, and South Iran Nubo-Sindian desert and semi-desert.[191]
i
iMuch of Iraq has a hot arid climate with subtropical influence. Summer
itemperatures average above 40 °C (104 °F) for most of the country and
ifrequently exceed 48 °C (118.4 °F). Winter temperatures infrequently exceed
i21
i°C (69.8 °F) with maxima roughly 15 to 19 °C (59.0 to 66.2 °F) and night-time
ilows 2 to 5 °C (35.6 to 41.0 °F). Typically, precipitation is low; most
iplaces
ireceive less than 250 mm (9.8 in) annually, with maximum rainfall occurring
iduring the winter months. Rainfall during the summer is rare, except in
inorthern parts of the country. The northern mountainous regions have cold
iwinters with occasional heavy snows, sometimes causing extensive flooding.
i
iIraq is highly vulnerable to climate change.[192] The country is subject to
irising temperatures and reduced rainfall, and suffers from increasing water
iscarcity for a human population that rose tenfold between 1890 and 2010 and
icontinues to rise.[193][194]
i
iThe wildlife of Iraq includes its flora and fauna and their natural
ihabitats.[196] Iraq has multiple and diverse biomes which include the
imountainous region in norther to the wet marshlands along the Euphrates and
iTigris rives, while western part of the country comprises mainly desert and
isome semi-arid regions. Many of Iraq's bird species were endangered,
iincluding
iseven of Iraq's mammal species and 12 of its bird species. Little progress
ihas
ibeen made by the government to tackle the issue. The Mesopotamian marches in
ithe middle and south are home to approximately 50 species of birds, and rare
ispecies of fish. The marshes are home to millions of birds and the stopover
ifor millions of migratory birds, including flamingo, pelican and heron. At
irisk are some 50% of the world's marbled teal population that live in the
imarshes, along with 60% of the world's population of Basra reed-warbler.[197]
iAn essentially experimental draining of the Mesopotamian Marshes, by Saddam's
iregime, caused there a significant drop in biological life and heated many
ipaddies and fields to higher consumption of water and low productivity. Since
ithe overthrow, flow is restored and the ecosystem has begun to recover, fast
iwater runoff and drought less severe, and crop yields made more
isustainable.[198]
i
iIraqi corals are some of the most extreme heat-tolerant as the seawater in
ithis area ranges between 14 and 34 °C.[199]
i
iAquatic or semi-aquatic wildlife occurs in and around these, the major
ilakes:[200]
i
i===== Government and politics =====
i
iThe federal government of Iraq is defined under the current Constitution as a
idemocratic, federal parliamentary republic. The federal government is
icomposed
iof the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, as well as numerous
iindependent commissions. Aside from the federal government, there are regions
i(made of one or more governorates), governorates, and districts within Iraq
iwith jurisdiction over various matters as defined by law.[1]
i
iThe National Alliance is the main Shia parliamentary bloc, and was
iestablished as a result of a merger of Prime Minister Nouri Maliki's State of
iLaw Coalition and the Iraqi National Alliance.[201] The Iraqi National
iMovement is led by Iyad Allawi, a secular Shia widely supported by Sunnis.
iThe
iparty has a more consistent anti-sectarian perspective than most of its
irivals.[201] The Kurdistan List is dominated by two parties, the Kurdistan
iDemocratic Party led by Masood Barzani and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
iheaded by Jalal Talabani. Both parties are secular and enjoy close ties with
ithe West.[201]
i
iIn 2008, according to the Failed States Index, Iraq was the world's eleventh
imost politically unstable country.[202][203] The concentration of power in
ithe
ihands of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and growing pressure on the
iopposition
iled to growing concern about the future of political rights in Iraq.[204]
iNevertheless, progress was made and the country had risen to 11th place by
i2013.[205]
i
iIn August 2014, al-Maliki's reign came to an end. He announced on 14 August
i2014 that he would stand aside so that Haider Al-Abadi, who had been
inominated
ijust days earlier by newly installed President Fuad Masum, could take over.
iUntil that point, al-Maliki had clung to power even asking the federal court
ito veto the president's nomination describing it as a violation of the
iconstitution.[206]
i
iTransparency International ranks Iraq's government as the eighth-most-corrupt
igovernment in the world. Government payroll have increased from 1 million
iemployees under Saddam Hussein to around 7 million employees in 2016. In
icombination with decreased oil prices, the government budget deficit is near
i25% of GDP as of 2016[update].[207]
i
iSince the establishment of the no–fly zones following the Gulf War of
i1990–1991, the Kurds established their own autonomous region.[citation
ineeded]
i
iIn October 2005, the new Constitution of Iraq was approved in a referendum
iwith a 78% overall majority, although the percentage of support varied widely
ibetween the country's territories.[208] The new constitution was backed by
ithe
iShia and Kurdish communities, but was rejected by Arab Sunnis. Under the
iterms
iof the constitution, the country conducted fresh nationwide parliamentary
ielections on 15 December 2005. All three major ethnic groups in Iraq voted
ialong ethnic lines, as did Assyrian and Turcoman minorities. Law no. 188 of
ithe year 1959 (Personal Status Law)[209] made polygamy extremely difficult,
igranted child custody to the mother in case of divorce, prohibited
irepudiation
iand marriage under the age of 16.[210] Article 1 of Civil Code also
iidentifies
iIslamic law as a formal source of law.[211] Iraq had no Sharia courts but
icivil courts used Sharia for issues of personal status including marriage and
idivorce. In 1995 Iraq introduced Sharia punishment for certain types of
icriminal offences.[212] The code is based on French civil law as well as
iSunni
iand Jafari (Shi'ite) interpretations of Sharia.[213]
i
iIn 2004, the CPA chief executive L. Paul Bremer said he would veto any
iconstitutional draft stating that sharia is the principal basis of law.[214]
iThe declaration enraged many local Shia clerics,[215] and by 2005 the United
iStates had relented, allowing a role for sharia in the constitution to help
iend a stalemate on the draft constitution.[216]
i
iThe Iraqi Penal Code is the statutory law of Iraq.
i
iIraqi security forces are composed of forces serving under the Ministry of
iInterior (MOI) and the Ministry of Defense (MOD), as well as the Iraqi
iCounter
iTerrorism Bureau, reporting directly to the Prime Minister of Iraq, which
ioversees the Iraqi Special Operations Forces. MOD forces include the Iraqi
iArmy, the Iraqi Air Force, Iraqi Navy and Peshmerga, which, along with their
isecurity subsidiaries, are responsible for the security of the Kurdistan
iRegion.[217] The MOD also runs a Joint Staff College, training army, navy,
iand
iair force officers, with support from the NATO Training Mission - Iraq. The
icollege was established at Ar Rustamiyah on September 27, 2005.[218] The
icenter runs Junior Staff and Senior Staff Officer Courses designed for first
ilieutenants to majors.
i
iThe current Iraqi armed forces was rebuilt on American foundations and with
ihuge amounts of American military aid at all levels. The army consists of 14
idivisions, all of them infantry, except for the ninth division, which is
imotorized infantry. Each division consists of four brigades and comprises
i14,000 soldiers. Before 2003, Iraq was mostly equipped with Soviet-made
imilitary equipment, but since then the country has turned to Western
isuppliers.[219]
i
iThe Iraqi air force is designed to support ground forces with surveillance,
ireconnaissance and troop lift. Two reconnaissance squadrons use light
iaircraft, three helicopter squadrons are used to move troops and one air
itransportation squadron uses C-130 transport aircraft to move troops,
iequipment, and supplies. The air force currently has 5,000 personnel.[220] It
iwas planned to increase to 18,000 personnel, with 550 aircraft by 2018, but
ithat did not happen as planned.[221]
i
iAs of February 2011, the navy had approximately 5,000 sailors, including 800
imarines. The navy consists of an operational headquarters, five afloat
isquadrons, and two marine battalions, designed to protect shorelines and
iinland waterways from insurgent infiltration.
i
iOn 4 November 2019, more than 100 Australian Defence Force personnel left
iDarwin for the 10th rotation of Task Group Taji, based north of Baghdad. The
iAustralian contingent mentors the Iraqi School of Infantry, where the Iraqi
iSecurity Forces are trained. However, Australia's contribution was reduced
ifrom 250 to 120 ADF personnel, which along with New Zealand had trained over
i45,000 ISF members before that.[222]
i
iOn 17 November 2008, the US and Iraq agreed to a Status of Forces
iAgreement,[223] as part of the broader Strategic Framework Agreement.[224]
iThis agreement states that "the Government of Iraq requests" US forces to
itemporarily remain in Iraq to "maintain security and stability" and that Iraq
ihas jurisdiction over military contractors, and US personnel when not on US
ibases or on–duty.
i
iOn 12 February 2009, Iraq officially became the 186th State Party to the
iChemical Weapons Convention. Under the provisions of this treaty, Iraq is
iconsidered a party with declared stockpiles of chemical weapons. Because of
itheir late accession, Iraq is the only State Party exempt from the existing
itimeline for destruction of their chemical weapons. Specific criteria are in
idevelopment to address the unique nature of Iraqi accession.[225]
i
iIran–Iraq relations have flourished since 2005 by the exchange of high level
ivisits: Iraqi PM Nouri al-Maliki made frequent visits to Iran, along with
iJalal Talabani visiting numerous times, to help boost bilateral co-operation
iin all fields.[citation needed] A conflict occurred in December 2009, when
iIraq accused Iran of seizing an oil well on the border.[226]
i
iRelations with Turkey are tense, largely because of the Kurdistan Regional
iGovernment, as clashes between Turkey and the PKK continue.[227] In October
i2011, the Turkish parliament renewed a law that gives Turkish forces the
iability to pursue rebels over the border in Iraq.[228] Turkey's "Great
iAnatolia Project" reduced Iraq's water supply and affected
iagriculture.[229][194]
i
iOn 5 January 2020, the Iraqi parliament voted for a resolution that urges the
igovernment to work on expelling US troops from Iraq. The resolution was
ipassed
itwo days after a US drone strike that killed Iranian Major General Qasem
iSoleimani of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, commander of the Quds
iForce. The resolution specifically calls for ending of a 2014 agreement
iallowing Washington to help Iraq against Islamic State groups by sending
itroops.[230] This resolution will also signify ending an agreement with
iWashington to station troops in Iraq as Iran vows to retaliate after the
ikilling.[231] On 28 September 2020, Washington made preparations to withdraw
idiplomats from Iraq, as a result of Iranian-backed militias firing rockets at
ithe American Embassy in Baghdad. The officials said that the move was seen as
ian escalation of American confrontation with Iran.[232]
i
iAccording to experts, it is not within the parliament's power to issue
ipolitical decisions, but rather its task is to issue legislation and laws,
iand
itherefore the decision issued was more of a recommendation or a proposal.
iMoreover, the government was a caretaker government, which means that its
imission is to run the day-to-day affairs of the country and not to take
idecisions to cancel the security agreement with the United States of America
ior any counterparts. An Iraqi legal expert, Tariq Harb, stated that the
iparliament's decision has no legal effect because it did not restrict its
iimplementation in time and left the matter to the government, which according
ito him is like a farce in order to absorb anger. He added that "the Speaker
iof
iParliament did not clarify the number of voters, the number of those who said
iyes and the number of those who said no", and that "a law should have been
iissued and not a decision".[233]
i
iRelations between Iraq and its Kurdish population have been sour in recent
ihistory, especially with Saddam Hussein's genocidal campaign against them in
ithe 1980s. After uprisings during the early 90s, many Kurds fled their
ihomeland and no-fly zones were established in northern Iraq to prevent more
iconflicts. Despite historically poor relations, some progress has been made,
iand Iraq elected its first Kurdish president, Jalal Talabani, in 2005.
iFurthermore, Kurdish is now an official language of Iraq alongside Arabic
iaccording to Article 4 of the Constitution.[1]
i
iLGBT rights in Iraq remain limited. Although decriminalised, homosexuality
iremains stigmatised in Iraqi society.[234]
i
iIraq is composed of nineteen governorates (or provinces) (Arabic: muhafadhat
i(singular muhafadhah); Kurdish: پارێزگا Pârizgah). The governorates are
isubdivided into districts (or qadhas), which are further divided into
isub-districts (or nawāḥī).
i
i===== Economy =====
i
iIraq's economy is dominated by the oil sector, which has traditionally
iprovided about 95% of foreign exchange earnings. The lack of development in
iother sectors has resulted in 18%–30% unemployed and a per capita GDP of
i$4,812.[2] Public sector employment accounted for nearly 60% of full-time
iemployment in 2011.[235] The oil export industry, which dominates the Iraqi
ieconomy, generates very little employment.[235] Currently only a modest
ipercentage of women (the highest estimate for 2011 was 22%) participate in
ithe
ilabour force.[235]
i
iPrior to US occupation, Iraq's centrally planned economy prohibited foreign
iownership of Iraqi businesses, ran most large industries as state-owned
ienterprises, and imposed large tariffs to keep out foreign goods.[236] After
ithe 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Coalition Provisional Authority quickly began
iissuing many binding orders privatising Iraq's economy and opening it up to
iforeign investment.
i
iOn 20 November 2004, the Paris Club of creditor nations agreed to write off
i80% ($33 billion) of Iraq's $42 billion debt to Club members. Iraq's total
iexternal debt was around $120 billion at the time of the 2003 invasion, and
ihad grown another $5 billion by 2004. The debt relief was to be implemented
iin
ithree stages: two of 30% each and one of 20%.[237]
i
iThe official currency in Iraq is the Iraqi dinar. The Coalition Provisional
iAuthority issued new dinar coins and notes, with the notes printed by De La
iRue using modern anti-forgery techniques.[238] Jim Cramer's 20 October 2009
iendorsement of the Iraqi dinar on CNBC has further piqued interest in the
iinvestment.[239]
i
iFive years after the invasion, an estimated 2.4 million people were
iinternally displaced (with a further two million refugees outside Iraq), four
imillion Iraqis were considered food-insecure (a quarter of children were
ichronically malnourished) and only a third of Iraqi children had access to
isafe drinking water.[240]
i
iIn 2022, and after more than 30 years after the UN Compensation Commission
i(UNCC) was created to ensure restitution for Kuwait following the Iraqi
iinvasion of 1990, the reparations body announced that Iraq has paid a total
iof
i$52.4 billion in war reparations to Kuwait.[241]
i
iAccording to the Overseas Development Institute, international NGOs face
ichallenges in carrying out their mission, leaving their assistance "piecemeal
iand largely conducted undercover, hindered by insecurity, a lack of
icoordinated funding, limited operational capacity and patchy
iinformation".[240] International NGOs have been targeted and during the first
i5 years, 94 aid workers were killed, 248 injured, 24 arrested or detained and
i89 kidnapped or abducted.[240]
i
iIraq was an important tourist destination for many years but that changed
idramatically during the war with Iran and after the 2003 invasion by US and
iallies. As Iraq continues to develop and stabilises, the tourism in Iraq is
istill facing many challenges, little has been made by the government to meet
iits tremendous potential as a global tourist destination, and gain the
iassociated economic benefits, mainly due to conflicts. However, in recent
iyears the government has made some efforts to attract tourists to the various
idestinations in the country and arrivals have increased to some degree. The
idomestic tourism has also seen improvements. Sites from Iraq's ancient past
iare numerous and many that are close to large cities have been excavated.
iBabylon has seen major recent restoration; known for its famous Ziggurat (the
iinspiration for the Biblical Tower of Babel), the Hanging Gardens (one of the
iSeven Wonders of the World), and the Ishtar Gate, making it a prime
idestination. Nineveh, a rival to Babylon, has also seen significant
irestoration and reconstruction, and lies close to Mosul. Ur, one of the first
iSumerian cities, which is near Nasiriyya, has been partially restored. This
iis
ia list of examples of some significant sites in a country with a tremendous
iarchaeological and historic wealth.[242] Iraq is considered to be a potential
ilocation for ecotourism.[243] The tourism in Iraq includes also making
ipilgrimages to holy Shia sites near Karbala and Najaf.
i
iWith its 143.1 billion barrels (2.275×1010 m3) of proved oil reserves, Iraq
iranks third in the world behind Venezuela and Saudi Arabia in the amount of
ioil reserves.[244][245] Oil production levels reached 3.4 million barrels per
iday by December 2012.[246] Only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in
iIraq, compared with about 1 million wells in Texas alone.[247] Iraq was one
iof
ithe founding members of OPEC.[248][249]
i
iDuring the 1970s Iraq produced up to 3.5 million barrels per day, but
isanctions imposed against Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait in 1990 crippled
ithe country's oil sector. The sanctions prohibited Iraq from exporting oil
iuntil 1996 and Iraq's output declined by 85% in the years following the First
iGulf War. The sanctions were lifted in 2003 after the US-led invasion removed
iSaddam Hussein from power, but development of Iraq's oil resources has been
ihampered by the ongoing conflict.[250]
i
iAs of 2010[update], despite improved security and billions of dollars in oil
irevenue, Iraq still generates about half the electricity that customers
idemand, leading to protests during the hot summer months.[251]
i
iThe Iraq oil law, a proposed piece of legislation submitted to the Council of
iRepresentatives of Iraq in 2007, has failed to gain approval due to
idisagreements among Iraq's various political blocs.[252][253]
i
iAccording to a US Study from May 2007, between 100,000 barrels per day
i(16,000 m3/d) and 300,000 barrels per day (48,000 m3/d) of Iraq's declared
ioil
iproduction over the past four years could have been siphoned off through
icorruption or smuggling.[254] In 2008, Al Jazeera reported $13 billion of
iIraqi oil revenues in US care was improperly accounted for, of which $2.6
ibillion is totally unaccounted for.[255] Some reports that the government has
ireduced corruption in public procurement of oil; however, reliable reports of
ibribery and kickbacks to government officials persist.[256]
i
iIn June 2008, the Iraqi Oil Ministry announced plans to go ahead with small
ione- or two-year no-bid contracts to ExxonMobil, Shell, Total and BP—once
ipartners in the Iraq Petroleum Company—along with Chevron and smaller firms
ito
iservice Iraq's largest fields.[257] These plans were cancelled in September
ibecause negotiations had stalled for so long that the work could not be
icompleted within the time frame, according to Iraqi oil minister Hussain
ial-Shahristani. Several United States senators had also criticised the deal,
iarguing it was hindering efforts to pass the hydrocarbon law.[258]
i
iOn 30 June and 11 December 2009, the Iraqi ministry of oil awarded service
icontracts to international oil companies for some of Iraq's many oil
ifields.[259][260] Oil fields contracted include the "super-giant" Majnoon oil
ifield, Halfaya Field, West Qurna Field and Rumaila Field.[260] BP and China
iNational Petroleum Corporation won a deal to develop Rumaila, the largest
iIraqi oil field.[261][262]
i
iOn 14 March 2014, the International Energy Agency said Iraq's oil output
ijumped by half a million barrels a day in February to average 3.6 million
ibarrels a day. The country had not pumped that much oil since 1979, when
iSaddam Hussein rose to power.[263] However, on 14 July 2014, as sectarian
istrife had taken hold, Kurdistan Regional Government forces seized control of
ithe Bai Hassan and Kirkuk oilfields in the north of the country, taking them
ifrom Iraq's control. Baghdad condemned the seizure and threatened "dire
iconsequences" if the fields were not returned.[264]
i
iOn 2018, the UN estimated that oil accounts for 99% of Iraq's revenue.[250]
iAs of 2021, the oil sector provided about 92% of foreign exchange
iearnings.[265]
i
iThree decades of war greatly cut the existing water resources management
isystem for several major cities. This prompted widespread water supply and
isanitation shortfalls thus poor water and service quality.[194] This is
icombined with few businesses and households who are fully environmentally
iaware and legally compliant however the large lakes, as pictured, alleviate
isupply relative to many comparators in Western Asia beset by more regular
idrought. Access to potable water diverges among governorates and between
iurban
iand rural areas. 91% of the population has access to potable water. Forming
ithis figure: in rural areas, 77% of people have access to improved (treated
ior
ifully naturally filtered) drinking water sources; and 98% in urban
iareas.[266]
iMuch water is discarded during treatment, due to much outmoded equipment,
iraising energy burden and reducing supply.[266]
i
iAlthough many infrastructure projects had already begun, at the end of 2013
iIraq had a housing crisis. The then very war-ravaged country was set to
icomplete 5 percent of the 2.5 million homes it needs to build by 2016 to keep
iup with demand, confirmed the Minister for Construction and Housing.[267]
iMuch
ibuilding has followed but there remains strong demand for larger, and usually
iideally single-family, homes in most parts of Iraq.
i
i===== Demographics =====
i
iThe 2021 estimate of the total Iraqi population is 43,533,592.[272][273]
iIraq's population was estimated to be 2 million in 1878.[274] In 2013 Iraq's
ipopulation reached 35 million amid a post-war population boom.[275]
i
iIraq's native population is predominantly Arab, but also includes other
iethnic groups such as Kurds, Turkmens, Assyrians, Yazidis, Shabaks,
iArmenians,
iMandaeans, Circassians, and Kawliya.
i
iA report by the European Parliamentary Research Service suggests that, in
i2015, there were 24 million Arabs (14 million Shia and 9 million Sunni); 4.7
imillion Sunni Kurds (plus 500,000 Faili Kurds and 200,000 Kaka'i); 3 million
i(mostly Sunni) Iraqi Turkmens; 1 million Black Iraqis; 500,000 Christians
i(including Chaldeans, Syriacs, Assyrians and Armenians); 500,000 Yazidis;
i250,000 Shabaks; 50,000 Roma; 3,000 Mandaeans; 2,000 Circassians; 1,000 of
ithe
iBaháʼí Faith; and a few dozen Jews.[276]
i
iAccording to the CIA World Factbook, citing a 1987 Iraqi government
iestimate,[2] the population of Iraq is 75–80% Arab followed by 15–20%
iKurds.[2] In addition, the estimate claims that other minorities form 5% of
ithe country's population, including the Turkmen/Turcoman, Assyrians, Yezidis,
iShabak, Kaka'i, Bedouins, Roma, Circassians, Mandaeans, and Persians.[2]
iHowever, the International Crisis Group points out that figures from the 1987
icensus, as well as the 1967, 1977, and 1997 censuses, "are all considered
ihighly problematic, due to suspicions of regime manipulation" because Iraqi
icitizens were only allowed to indicate belonging to either the Arab or
iKurdish
iethnic groups;[277] consequently, this skewed the number of other ethnic
iminorities, such as Iraq's third largest ethnic group – the Turkmens.[277]
i
iAround 20,000 Marsh Arabs live in southern Iraq.[278]
i
iIraq has a community of 2,500 Chechens,[279] and some 20,000 Armenians.[280]
iIn southern Iraq, there is a community of Iraqis of African descent, a legacy
iof the slavery practised in the Islamic Caliphate beginning before the Zanj
iRebellion of the 9th century, and Basra's role as a key port.[91] It is the
imost populous country in the Arabian Plate.[281]
i
iThe main languages spoken in Iraq are Mesopotamian Arabic and Kurdish,
ifollowed by the Iraqi Turkmen/Turkoman dialect of Turkish, and the
iNeo-Aramaic
ilanguages (specifically Chaldean and Assyrian).[282] Arabic and Kurdish are
iwritten with versions of the Arabic script. Since 2005, the Turkmen/Turkoman
ihave switched from the Arabic script to the Turkish alphabet.[283] In
iaddition, the Neo-Aramaic languages use the Syriac script.
i
iOther smaller minority languages include Mandaic, Shabaki, Armenian,
iCircassian and Persian.
i
iPrior to the invasion in 2003, Arabic was the sole official language. Since
ithe new Constitution of Iraq was approved in 2005, both Arabic and Kurdish
iare
irecognised (Article 4) as official languages of Iraq, while three other
ilanguages: Turkmen, Syriac and Armenian, are also recognised as minority
ilanguages. In addition, any region or province may declare other languages
iofficial if a majority of the population approves in a general referendum.[1]
i
iAccording to the Constitution of Iraq (Article 4):
i
iReligions in Iraq are dominantly Abrahamic religions with the CIA World
iFactbook (2021) stating; that 95% were Muslim (Shia 64–69%, Sunni 29–34%),
iChristian, Yazidi, Mandaean, Baháʼí, Zoroastrian, Hindu, Buddhist, Jewish,
ifolk religion, unaffiliated, other 5% [2] It has a mixed Shia and Sunni
ipopulation. An older 2011 Pew Research Center estimates that 47~51% of
iMuslims
iin Iraq see themselves as Shia, 42% are Sunni, while 5% identify themselves
ias
i"Just a Muslim".[284]
i
iThe Sunni population complains of facing discrimination in almost all aspects
iof life by the government. However, former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki
idenied that such discrimination occurs.[285]
i
iChristianity in Iraq has its roots from the conception of the Church of the
iEast in the 5th century AD, predating the existence of Islam in the region.
iChristians in Iraq are predominantly native Assyrians belonging to the
iAncient
iChurch of the East, Assyrian Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church,
iSyriac Catholic Church and Syriac Orthodox Church. There is also a
isignificant
ipopulation of Armenian Christians in Iraq who had fled Turkey during the
iArmenian genocide. Christians numbered over 1.4 million in 1987 or 8% of the
iestimated population of 16.3 million and 550,000 in 1947 or 12% of the
ipopulation of 4.6 millions.[287] After the 2003 invasion of Iraq, violence
iagainst Christians rose, with reports of abduction, torture, bombings, and
ikillings.[288] The post-2003 Iraq War have displaced much of the remaining
iChristian community from their homeland as a result of ethnic and religious
ipersecution at the hands of Islamic extremists.[289][290][291][292][293][294]
i
iThere are also small ethno-religious minority populations of Mandaeans,
iShabaks, Yarsan and Yezidis remaining. Prior to 2003 their numbers together
imay have been 2 million, the majority Yarsan, a non-Islamic religion with
iroots in pre-Islamic and pre-Christian religion. The Iraqi Jewish community,
inumbering around 150,000 in 1941, has almost entirely left the country.[295]
i
iIraq is home to two of the world's holiest places among Shi'as: Najaf and
iKarbala.[296]
i
iThe dispersion of native Iraqis to other countries is known as the Iraqi
idiaspora. The UN High Commission for Refugees has estimated that nearly two
imillion Iraqis fled the country after the multinational invasion of Iraq in
i2003.[297] The UN Refugee agency estimated in 2021 that an 1.1 million were
idisplaced within the country.[298]
i
iIn 2007, the UN said that about 40% of Iraq's middle class was believed to
ihave fled and that most had fled systematic persecution and had no desire to
ireturn.[299] Refugees are mired in poverty as they are generally barred from
iworking in their host countries.[300][301] Subsequently, the diaspora seemed
ito be returning, as security improved; the Iraqi government claimed that
i46,000 refugees returned to their homes in October 2007 alone.[302]
i
iIn 2011, nearly 3 million Iraqis had been displaced, with 1.3 million within
iIraq and 1.6 million in neighbouring countries, mainly Jordan and Syria.[303]
iMore than half of Iraqi Christians had fled the country since the 2003 US-led
iinvasion.[304][305] According to official United States Citizenship and
iImmigration Services statistics, 58,811 Iraqis had been granted
irefugee-status
icitizenship as of 25 May 2011[update].[306]
i
iAfter the start of the Syrian Civil War in 2011, numerous Iraqis in Syria
ireturned to their native country.[307] To escape the Syrian civil war, over
i252,000 Syrian refugees of varying ethnicities have fled to Iraq since
i2012.[308]
i
iIn 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 6.84% of the country's GDP. In
i2008, there were 6.96 physicians and 13.92 nurses per 10,000
iinhabitants.[309]
iThe life expectancy at birth was 68.49 years in 2010, or 65.13 years for
imales
iand 72.01 years for females.[310] This is down from a peak life expectancy of
i71.31 years in 1996.[311]
i
iIraq had developed a centralised free health care system in the 1970s using a
ihospital based, capital-intensive model of curative care. The country
idepended
ion large-scale imports of medicines, medical equipment and even nurses, paid
ifor with oil export income, according to a "Watching Brief" report issued
ijointly by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health
iOrganization (WHO) in July 2003. Unlike other poorer countries, which focused
ion mass health care using primary care practitioners, Iraq developed a
iWesternised system of sophisticated hospitals with advanced medical
iprocedures, provided by specialist physicians. The UNICEF/WHO report noted
ithat prior to 1990, 97% of the urban dwellers and 71% of the rural population
ihad access to free primary health care; just 2% of hospital beds were
iprivately managed.[312]
i
iBefore Iraq faced economic sanctions from the UN, it already had an advanced
iand successful education system.[313] However, it has now been
i"de-developing"
iin its educational success.[313] Some say that the sanctions, whether
iintentionally or not, hurt the education system because of how it affected
ithe
ichildren.[313] Whether or not this is true, UNICEF's statistics and numbers
ishow how Iraq's education system has room for improvement.[314]
i
iIn general, the education of Iraq has been improving since the MDGs were
iimplemented.[314] For example, enrollment numbers nearly doubled from 2000 to
i2012.[314] It went from 3.6 million to six million.[314] The latest statistic
ifrom 2015 to 2016 showed that almost 9.2 million children were in
ischool.[314]
iEnrollment rates continue to be on a steady increase at about 4.1% each
iyear.[314] The sheer increase in numbers shows that there are clearly
iimprovements of children in Iraq having access to education.
i
iHowever, the dramatic increase of the number of students in primary education
ihas had some negative and straining effects for the education system.[314]
iThe
ibudget for education makes up about only 5.7% of government spending and
icontinues to stay at or below this percentage.[314] Investments for schools
ihas also been on the decline.[314] As a result, the country now ranks at the
ibottom of Middle East countries in terms of education.[314] The little
ifunding
ifor education makes it more difficult to improve the quality and resources
ifor
ieducation.[314]
i
iAt the same time, UNICEF investigated portions of spending for education and
ifound that some of the money has gone to waste.[314] They found that dropout
irates are increasing as well as repetition rates for children.[314] In both
iIraq Centre and KRI, the rates for dropouts are about 1.5% to 2.5%.[314]
iWithin these dropout rates, there is also an uneven number among boys and
igirls who dropout.[314] While the rate for dropouts for boys was around
i16.5%,
igirls were at 20.1% where it could be due to economic or family reasons.[314]
iFor repetition rates, percentages have almost reached 17% among all
istudents.[314] To put the money loss in perspective, about $1,100 is spent on
ieach student.[314] For each student who drops out or repeats a grade, $1,100
iis lost.[314] As a result, almost 20% of the funding for education was lost
ito
idropouts and repetition for the year 2014–2015.[314]
i
iMany of those people who dropout or have to repeat a grade do not see the
ieconomic cost for long term results.[314] UNICEF takes note of how staying in
ischool can in fact, increase wealth for the person and their family.[314]
iWhile it may put a strain on the education system, it will also hinder the
ichances of a person receiving higher earnings in whatever career they go
iinto.[314]
i
iOther statistics show that regional differences can attribute to lower or
ihigher enrollment rates for children in primary education.[314] For example,
iUNICEF found that areas with conflict like Saladin had "more than 90% of
ischool-age children" not in the education system.[314] In addition, some
ischools were converted into refugee shelters or military bases in 2014 as
iconflict began to increase.[315] The resources for education become more
istrained and make it harder for children to go to school and finish receiving
itheir education.[315] However, in 2017, there were efforts being made to open
iup 47 schools that had previously been closed.[316] There has been more
isuccess in Mosul where over 380,000 are going to school again.[316] Depending
ion where children live, they may or may not have the same access to education
ias other children. There are also the differing enrollment rates between boys
iand girls.[314] UNICEF found that in 2013–2014, enrollment numbers for boys
iwas at about five million while girls were at about 4.2 million.[314] While
ithe out-of-school rate for girls is at about 11%, boys are at less than half
iof that.[314] There is still a gap between boys and girls in terms of
ieducational opportunities.[314] However, the rate of enrollments for girls
ihas
ibeen increasing at a higher rate than for boys.[314] In 2015–2016, the
ienrollment numbers for girls increased by 400,000 from the previous year
iwhere
ia large number of them were located in Iraq Centre.[314] Not only that,
iUNICEF
ifound that the increase of girls going to school was across all levels of
ieducation.[314] Therefore, the unequal enrollment numbers between boys and
igirls could potentially change so that universal education can be achieved by
iall at equal rates.
i
iAlthough the numbers suggest a dramatic increase of enrollment rates for
iprimary education in total, a large number of children still remain out of
ithe
ieducation system.[314] Many of these children fall under the category of
iinternally displaced children due to the conflict in Syria and the takeover
iby
iISIL.[314] This causes a disruption for children who are attempting to go to
ischool and holds them back from completing their education, no matter what
ilevel they are at.[314] Internally displaced children are specifically
irecorded to track children who have been forced to move within their country
idue to these types of conflicts. About 355,000 of internally displaced
ichildren are not in the education system.[314] 330,000 of those children live
iin Iraq Centre.[314] The rates among internally displaced children continue
ito
iremain higher in Iraq Centre than other areas such as the KRI.[314]
i
iWith the overall increase of enrollment rates, there continues to be a large
istrain on the resources for education.[314] UNICEF notes that without an
iincrease on expenditures for education, the quality of education will
icontinue
ito decrease.[314] Early in the 2000s, the UNESCO International Bureau of
iEducation found that the education system in Iraq had issues with
istandard-built school buildings, having enough teachers, implementing a
istandardized curricula, textbooks and technologies that are needed to help
ireach its educational goals.[313] Teachers are important resources that are
istarting to become more and more strained with the rising number of
istudents.[314] Iraq Centre has a faster enrollment growth rate than teacher
igrowth.[314] Teachers begin to have to take in more and more students which
ican produce a bigger strain on the teacher and quality of education the
ichildren receive.[314] Another large resource for education is libraries that
ican increase literacy and create a reading culture.[317] However, this can
ionly be improved through a restructuring of the education system.[317]
i
i===== Culture =====
i
iIraq's culture has a deep heritage that extends back in time to ancient
iMesopotamian culture. Iraq has one of the longest written traditions in the
iworld including architecture, literature, music, dance, painting, weaving,
ipottery, calligraphy, stonemasonry and metalworking. The culture of Iraq or
iMesopotamia is one of the world's oldest cultural histories and is considered
ione of the most influential cultures in the world. Mesopotamian legacy went
ion
ito influence and shape the civilizations of the Old World in different ways
isuch as inventing writing system, mathematics, time, calendar, astrology and
ilaw code.[14][15] Iraq is home diverse ethnic groups and has a very long and
irich heritage and have contributed to the culture differently. The country is
iknown for its poets، architects، painters and sculptors who are among the
ibest
iin the region, some of them being world-class. Iraq is known for producing
ifine handicrafts, including rugs and carpets among many other things.
i
iFor centuries, the capital, Baghdad was the Medieval centre of the literary
iand artistic Arab world, but its artistic traditions suffered at the hands of
ithe Mongol invaders in the 13th century. Baghdad evolved into a significant
icultural, commercial, and intellectual center of the Muslim world. This, in
iaddition to housing several key academic institutions, including the House of
iWisdom, as well as hosting a multiethnic and multireligious environment,
igarnered the city a worldwide reputation as the "Centre of Learning".[318]
i
iThere were several interconnected traditions of art in ancient Iraq. The
iAbbasid Dynasty developed in the Abbasid Caliphate between 750 and 945,
iprimarily in its heartland of Mesopotamia. The Abbasids were influenced
imainly
iby Mesopotamian art traditions and later influenced Persian as well as
iCentral
iAsian styles. Between the 8th and 13th-centuries during the Abbasid period,
ipottery achieved a high level of sophistication, calligraphy began to be used
ito decorate the surface of decorative objects and illuminated manuscripts,
iparticularly Q'ranic texts became more complex and stylised. Iraq's first art
ischool was established during this period, allowing artisans and crafts to
iflourish.[320]
i
iAt the height of the Abbasid period, in the late 12th century, a stylistic
imovement of manuscript illustration and calligraphy emerged. Now known as the
iBaghdad School, this movement of Islamic art was characterised by
irepresentations of everyday life and the use of highly expressive faces
irather
ithan the stereotypical characters that had been used in the past. The school
iconsisted of calligraphers, illustrators, transcribers and translators, who
icollaborated to produce illuminated manuscripts derived from non-Arabic
isources. The works were primarily scientific, philosophical, social
icommentary
ior humorous entertainments.[321]
i
iThe architecture of Iraq has a long history, encompassing several distinct
icultures and spanning a period from the 10th millennium BC and features both
iMesopotamian and Abbasid architecture. Modern prominent architects include
iZaha Hadid, Basil Bayati, Rifat Chadirji and Hisham N. Ashkouri among
iothers.[323]
i
iImportant cultural institutions in the capital include the Iraqi National
iSymphony Orchestra – rehearsals and performances were briefly interrupted
iduring the Occupation of Iraq but have since returned to normal.[324] The
iNational Theatre of Iraq was looted during the 2003 invasion, but efforts are
iunderway to restore it. The live theatre scene received a boost during the
i1990s when UN sanctions limited the import of foreign films. As many as 30
icinemas were reported to have been converted to live stages, producing a wide
irange of comedies and dramatic productions.
i
iInstitutions offering cultural education in Baghdad include the Academy of
iMusic, Institute of Fine Arts and the Music and Ballet school Baghdad.
iBaghdad
ialso features a number of museums including the National Museum of Iraq –
iwhich houses the world's largest and finest collection of artefacts and
irelics
iof Ancient Iraqi civilisations; some of which were stolen during the
iOccupation of Iraq. On 2021, it was announced that Iraq had reclaimed about
i17,000 looted artifacts, which was considered to be the biggest
irepatriation.[325]
i
iThe capital, Ninus or Nineveh, was taken by the Medes under Cyaxares, and
isome 200 years after Xenophon passed over its site, then mere mounds of
iearth.
iIt remained buried until 1845, when Botta and Layard discovered the ruins of
ithe Assyrian cities. The principal remains are those of Khorsabad, 16 km (10
imi) N.E. of Mosul; of Nimroud, supposed to be the ancient Calah; and of
iKouyunjik, in all probability the ancient Nineveh. In these cities are found
ifragments of several great buildings which seem to have been palace-temples.
iThey were constructed chiefly of sun-dried bricks, and all that remains of
ithem is the lower part of the walls, decorated with sculpture and paintings,
iportions of the pavements, a few indications of the elevation, and some
iinteresting works connected with the drainage.
i
iThe literature in Iraq is often referred to as "Mesopotamian literature" due
ito the flourishing of various civilisations as a result of the mixture of
ithese cultures and has been called Mesopotamian or Babylonian literature in
iallusion to the geographical territory that such cultures occupied in the
iMiddle East between the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.[326] The
iSumerian literature was unique because it does not belong to any known
ilinguistic root. Its appearance began with symbols of the things denoting it,
ithen it turned with time to the cuneiform line on tablets. The literature
iduring this time were mainly about mythical and epic texts dealing with
icreation issues, the emergence of the world, the gods, descriptions of the
iheavens, and the lives of heroes in the wars that broke out between the
inomads
iand the urbanites. They also deal with religious teachings, moral advice,
iastrology, legislation, and history. One of which was the Epic of Gilgamesh,
iwhich is regarded as the earliest surviving notable literature.[327] During
ithe Abbasid Caliphate, the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, which was a public
iacademy and intellectual center hosted numerous scholars and writers. A
inumber
iof stories in One Thousand and One Nights feature famous Abbasid
ifigures.[328]
i
iIraq has various medieval poets, most remarkably Hariri of Basra, Mutanabbi,
iAbu Nuwas, and Al-Jahiz.
i
iIn modern times, various languages are used in Iraqi literature including
iArabic, Neo-Aramaic, Kurdish and Turkish, although the Arabic literature
iremains the most influential literature. Notably poets include Jawahiri, Safa
iKhulusi and Dunya Mikhail.
i
iIraq is known primarily for its rich maqam heritage which has been passed
idown orally by the masters of the maqam in an unbroken chain of transmission
ileading up to the present. The Iraqi maqam is considered to be the most noble
iand perfect form of maqam. Al-maqam al-Iraqi is the collection of sung poems
iwritten either in one of the sixteen meters of classical Arabic or in Iraqi
idialect (Zuhayri).[329] This form of art is recognised by UNESCO as "an
iintangible heritage of humanity".[330]
i
iEarly in the 20th century, many of the most prominent musicians in Iraq were
iJewish.[331] In 1936, Iraq Radio was established with an ensemble made up
ientirely of Jews, with the exception of the percussion player. At the
inightclubs of Baghdad, ensembles consisted of oud, qanun and two
ipercussionists, while the same format with a ney and cello were used on the
iradio.[331]
i
iThe most famous singer of the 1930s–1940s was perhaps the Jew Salima Pasha
i(later Salima Murad).[331][332] The respect and adoration for Pasha were
iunusual at the time since public performance by women was considered
ishameful,
iand most female singers were recruited from brothels.[331]
i
iThe most famous early composer from Iraq was Ezra Aharon, an oud player,
iwhile the most prominent instrumentalist was Yusuf Za'arur.[citation needed]
iZa'arus formed the official ensemble for the Iraqi radio station and were
iresponsible for introducing the cello and ney into the traditional
iensemble.[331]
i
iIraq was home to the second television station in the Middle East, which
ibegan during the 1950s. As part of a plan to help Iraq modernise, English
itelecommunications company Pye Limited built and commissioned a television
ibroadcast station in the capital city of Baghdad.[333]
i
iAfter the end of the full state control in 2003, there were a period of
isignificant growth in the broadcast media in Iraq.[334] Immediately, and the
iban on satellite dishes is no longer in place, and by mid-2003, according to
ia
iBBC report, there were 20 radio stations from 0.15 to 17 television stations
iowned by Iraqis, and 200 Iraqi newspapers owned and operated. Significantly,
ithere have been many of these newspapers in numbers disproportionate to the
ipopulation of their locations. For example, in Najaf, which has a population
iof 300,000, is being published more than 30 newspapers and distributed.
i
iIraqi media expert and author of a number of reports on this subject, Ibrahim
iAl Marashi, identifies four stages of the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 where
ithey had been taking the steps that have significant effects on the way for
ithe later of the Iraqi media since then. Stages are: pre-invasion
ipreparation,
iand the war and the actual choice of targets, the first post-war period, and
ia
igrowing insurgency and hand over power to the Iraqi Interim Government (IIG)
iand Prime Minister Iyad Allawi.[335][page needed]
i
iAs of 2020, the media in Iraq is considered as one of the biggest in Middle
iEast, having more than 100 radio stations and 150 television stations
ibroadcasting in Arabic, English, Kurdish, Turkmen, and Neo-Aramaic.
i
iIraqi cuisine can be traced back some 10,000 years – to the Sumerians,
iAkkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians and Ancient Persians.[336] Tablets found in
iancient ruins in Iraq show recipes prepared in the temples during religious
ifestivals – the first cookbooks in the world.[336] Ancient Iraq, or
iMesopotamia, was home to many sophisticated and highly advanced
icivilisations,
iin all fields of knowledge – including the culinary arts.[336] However, it
iwas
iin the medieval era when Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate
ithat
ithe Iraqi kitchen reached its zenith.[336] Today the cuisine of Iraq reflects
ithis rich inheritance as well as strong influences from the culinary
itraditions of neighbouring Turkey, Iran and the Greater Syria area.[336]
i
iSome characteristic ingredients of Iraqi cuisine include – vegetables such as
iaubergine, tomato, okra, onion, potato, courgette, garlic, peppers and
ichilli,
icereals such as rice, bulgur wheat and barley, pulses and legumes such as
ilentils, chickpeas and cannellini, fruits such as dates, raisins, apricots,
ifigs, grapes, melon, pomegranate and citrus fruits, especially lemon and
ilime.[336]
i
iSimilarly with other countries of Western Asia, chicken and especially lamb
iare the favourite meats. Most dishes are served with rice – usually Basmati,
igrown in the marshes of southern Iraq.[336] Bulgur wheat is used in many
idishes – having been a staple in the country since the days of the Ancient
iAssyrians.[336]
i
iFootball is the most popular sport in Iraq. Football is a considerable
iuniting factor in Iraq following years of war and unrest. Basketball,
iswimming, weightlifting, bodybuilding, boxing, kick boxing and tennis are
ialso
ipopular sports.
i
iThe Iraqi Football Association is the governing body of football in Iraq,
icontrolling the Iraq national football team and the Iraqi Premier League. It
iwas founded in 1948, and has been a member of FIFA since 1950 and the Asian
iFootball Confederation since 1971. Iraq were the 2007 AFC Asian Cup champions
iafter defeating Saudi Arabia in the final by 1–0 thanks to a goal by captain
iYounis Mahmoud and they have participated in two FIFA competitions (the 1986
iFIFA World Cup and the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup).
i
i===== See also =====
i
i===== References =====
i
i===== Bibliography =====
i
i===== Further reading =====
i
i===== External links =====
i
iGovernment
i
iGeneral information
i
i
i
i  ------------- SOURCE ----------------
i
iURL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq
i
iLICENSE: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
i
i=========================================
i
i
i$
Bt:Iraq - Wikipedia	/x/w/g/https_58__47__47_en_46_wikipedia_46_org_47_wiki_47_Iraq	texopher.com	70
